Atlas Of Acupuncture Points
PointLocations
Published By
www.AcupunctureProducts.com
Copyright 2007
-2-
Table of Contents
Page
04 Lung Meridian
06 Large Intestine Meridian
08 Stomach Meridian
13 Spleen Meridian
15 Heart Meridian
16 Small Intestine Meridian
19 Bladder Meridian
23 Kidney Meridian
26 Pericardium Meridian
27 Triple Warmer Meridian
30 Gall Bladder Meridian
33 Liver Meridian
35 Conception Vessel
37 Governing Vessel
-3-
Meridian Abbreviations
There have been many abbreviations used to identify the acupuncture meridians, most are listed below. The bold
abbreviations are the ones used in this text.
LU= Lung meridian
LI, CO = Large Intestine meridian
ST= Stomach meridian
SP= Spleen meridian
HT, HE = Heart meridian
SI= Small Intestine meridian
BL, UB = Bladder meridian
KI= Kidney meridian
P, PC, HC = Pericardium, Heart Constrictor meridian
TW, TH, SJ = Triple Warmer, Tri -Heater, Triple Burner, San Jiao meridian
GB= Gallbladder meridian
LV, LI, LIV = Liver meridian
CV, VC, Ren = Conception Vessel meridian
GV, VG, Du = Governing Vessel meridian
Some older text use LI for Liver and CO for Large Intestine.
Cardinal Points: Points specific for area or condition.
Face & head -LI4
Neck -LU7
Chest & digestion -P6
Respiratory s ystem -LU5
Shoulder -ST38 also ST37
Scapula -SI11
Arm -LI11
Hand -TW5
Ear-TW5
Skin -GV20, LU9, LU11
Upper abdomen -ST36, CV12
Lower abdomen -SP6, CV6
Master energetical -ST36
Increase energy -CV6, ST36
General excess (energy) -GV14
Low back, s acrum & leg -BL54
Upper back, leg & foot -BL60
Nervous system -LV3
Neurological confusion -KI27
Sympathetic NS -GV20
Parasympathetic NS -ST36, SP6All cerebral disorders -GB20
Memory, mental, cerebral -GV20
Unconsciousness -GV26
Endocrine system -CV5
Lymphatics -LV2
Yang organs -CV12
Yin organs -LV13
Muscles & tendons -GB34
Bones -BL11
Bone marrow -GB39
Blood & blood chemistries -BL17
Blood sugars (diabetes) -SPl0
Blood vessels -LU9
Master associated point -KI27
Master luo point -SP21
Obesity -GV26
Anxiety with palpations -HT7
Whole body weakness pain -SP21
Center of respiration -CV17
Malpositioned fetus -BL67
Tsun orcunis the measurement of one “body inch” used locate acupuncture points. Measurement is always taken from the
patient’s hand. The width of the thumb is 1 cun, width of two fingers is 1.5 cun, four fingers is 3 cun. Proportional measurements:
Mid-line of spine to medial border of scapula 3 cun. Lower end of sternum to umbilicus 8 cun. Umbilicus to upper border of
symphysis pubis 8 cun.
-4-
LungMeridian(LU)
LungMeridian(LU)TheHandGreaterYin(TaiYin)oftheLunghas11points
ThelungchanneloftheHandTaiyinoriginatesfromthelateralaspectofthechestnearthearmpit.Itthentravelsalongthe
anterior-medialaspectoftheupperarm,passingthecubitalregionandarrivesattheradialsideofthewristcontainingtheradial
arteryforpulsepalpation.Passingthethenareminence,ittravelsalongtheradialborderofthepalmendingatthemedialsideof
thetipofthethumb.

-5-
Lung Meridian (LU)
Lung Meridian (LU) The Hand Greater Yin (Tai Yin) of the Lung has 11 points
Command Points
Water LU5 Sedation Pt
Metal LU8 Horary Pt
Earth LU9 Tonification Pt
Fire LU10
Wood LU11
Luo LU7
Xi-Cleft LU6
Source LU9Lung -Metal Element
Correspondences
Color White
Flavor Pungent
Sense Nose
Emotion Sadness
Tissue Skin
Climate Dryness
Sounds Crying
Odor Rotting
Season Autumn
Direction West
Cardinal Points
LU5 Respiratory System
LU7 Neck
LU9 Skin, Blood Vessels, Thr oat, Pulse
LU11 Skin
Point Locations:
LU1 Zhongfu -6 cun lateral to anterior midline level with the 1st intercostal space, 1 cun below LU2. Caution:
needle oblique to avoid lungs.
LU2 Yunmen -6 cun lateral to the anterior midline below the clavicle in the depression medial to the coracoid
process. Caution: needle oblique to avoid lungs.
LU3 Tianfu -3 cun inferior to the anterior axillary fold on radial side of biceps brachii muscle.
LU4 Xiabai -4 cun inferior to the anterior axillary fold, 1 cun i nferior to LU3 on radial side of biceps brachii
muscle.
LU5 Chize -On the cubital crease, in the depression lateral to biceps brachii tendon.
LU6 Kongzui -7 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist.
LU7 Lieque -1.5 cun above the transverse cre ase of the wrist, superior to the styloid process of the radius.
LU8 Jingqu -1 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist in the hollow on the lateral side of the radial artery.
LU9 Taiyuan -On transverse crease of the wrist on the lateral side of the radial artery.
LU10 Yuji -On the palmer side of the hand, at the midpoint of 1st metacarpal bone, at the junction of the red and
white skin.
LU11 Shaoshang -0.1 cun posterior to the nail on the radial side of the nail.
-6-
Large Intestine Meridian (LI)

-7-
Large Intestine (LI)
The Hand Bright Yang (Yang Ming) of the Large Intestine 20 points
The large intestine channel of the Hang -Yangming starts from the tip of the index finger. Running upward along the
radical aspect of the index finger, it passes t hrough the inter -space of the first and second metacarpal bones, and
ascends along the lateral anterior aspect of the upper arm to the highest point of the shoulder. It then travels along
the anterior border of the acromion, then descends to the supraclavi cular fossa. From the supraclavicular fossa it
travels upward to the neck and to the cheek, then it curves around the upper lip and exits at the corner of the mouth,
where it crosses the opposite large intestine channel of the Hand -Yangming at the philtrum .Itends at the side of the
nose, where is connects with the stomach channel of the Foot -Yangming.
Command Points
Earth LI11 Tonification Pt
Fire LI5
Wood LI3
Water LI2 Sedation Pt
Metal LI1 Horary Pt
Luo LI6
Xi-Cleft LI7
Source LI4Large Intestine -Metal Element
Correspondences
Color White
Flavor Pungent
Sense Nose
Emotion Sadness
Tissue Skin
Climate Dryness
Sounds Crying
Odor Rotting
Season Autumn
Direction West
Cardinal Points
LI4 Mental Function, Sensory Organs, Hand, Face, Head and Ear.
LI11 Fever, Arm and Skin.
Point Locations:
LI1 Shangyang -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the radial side of the index finger.
LI2 Erjian -On the radial side of the index finger distal to the 2nd metacarpal -phalangeal joint in a depression a t the
junction of the red & white skin.
LI3 Sanjian -On the radial side of the index finger proximal to the head of the 2nd metacarpal bone.
LI4 Hegu -On the dorsum of the hand, between the 1st and 2nd metacarpal bones.
LI5 Yangxi -On the radial si de of the wrist between the extensor pollicis longus & brevis tendons in a depression
formed when the thumb is tilted upward (anatomical snuffbox)
LI6 Pianli -3 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist (LI5) on the radial side of the forearm.
LI7Wenliu -5 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist (LI5) on the radial side of the forearm.
LI8 Xialian -4 cun below LI11 on the radial side of the forearm on the line connecting LI5 and LI11
LI9 Shanglian -3 cun below LI11 on the radial side of the forearm on the line connecting LI5 and LI11
LI10 Shousanli -2 cun below LI11 on the radial side of the forearm on the line connecting LI5 and LI11
LI11 Quchi -With a bent elbow, the point lies in the depression at the lateral end of the transve rse cubital crease,
midway between LU5 and the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
LI12 Zhouliao -With the elbow flexed, on the radial side of the upper arm 1 cun above and lateral to LI11 on the
lateral/posterior border of the humerus.
LI13 Shouwu li-3 cun above LI11 on the line connecting LI11 and LI15 line. Avoid injuring artery when needling!
-8-
LI14 Binao -4 cun above LI13 at the inferior border of the deltoid, on the line connecting LI11 and LI15.
LI15 Jianyu -Anterior and inferior to th e acromion, on the upper portion of the deltoid muscle, in a depression
formed when the arm is in full abduction.
LI16 Jugu -Slightly posterior to the shoulder, in the depression between the acromion process and the scapular
spine.
LI17 Tianding -Onthe lateral side of the neck, 1 cun below LI18 on the posterior border of the SCM muscle.
LI18 Futu -On the lateral side of the neck, level with the tip of the Adam's Apple between the sternal head and the
clavicular head of the SCM
LI19 Kouheliao -Directly below the lateral margin of the nostril 0.5 cun lateral to GV26.
LI20 Yingxiang -In the nasolabial sulcus, level with the midpoint of the lateral border of the ala nasi.
Stomach Meridian (ST)
The Foot Bright Yang (Yang Ming) of the Stomach 45 points
The stomach channel of the Foot -Yangming starts directly below the pupil between the eyeball and the infraorbital
ridge. Running downward along the lateral side of the nose, to the lateral corner of the mouth. Curving posterior to
the anterior angle of the mandible. Then it travels to the posterior aspect of the mandible ascending in front of the
ear and following the anterior hairline, it reaches the forehead. It then runs along the throat and enters the
supraclavicular fossa. The straight line of the channels separates the supraclavicular fossa and runs downward along
the middle mammillary line. It travels to the side of the umbilicus and descends to the inguinal groove. Running
downward it travels along the anterior aspect of the thigh and rea ches the knee. From there is continues further down
along the anterior border of the lateral aspect of the tibia to the dorsum of the foot and reaches the lateral side of the
tip of the second toe.
Command Points
Earth ST36 Horary
Fire ST41 Tonification Pt
Wood ST43
Water ST44
Metal ST45 Sedation Pt
Luo ST40
Xi-Cleft ST34
Source ST42Stomach -Earth Element
Correspondences
Color Yellow
Flavor Sweet
Sense Mouth
Emotion Worry
Tissue Muscles
Climate Humidity
Sounds Singing
Odor Fragrant
Season Autumn
Directi on Center
Cardinal Points
ST36 Upper Abdomen, Parasympathetic Nervous System, Increase Energy, Master Energetical
ST38 Shoulder
-9-
Stomach Meridian (ST)

-10-
Stomach Meridian (ST)

-11-
Stomach Meridian (ST)
The Foot Bright Yang (Yang Ming) of the Stomach 45 point s
Point Locations:
ST1 Chengqi -Directly below the pupil between the eyeball and the infraorbital ridge.
ST2 Sibai -Directly below the pupil in a depression at the infraorbital foramen.
ST3 Juliao -Directly below the pupil in a depression level with the lower border of the ala nasi.
ST4 Dicang -Directly below the pupil lateral to the corner of the mouth.
ST5 Daying -Anterior to the angle of the mandible on the anterior border of the masseter muscle in a groove like
depression when the cheek i s bulged.
ST6 Jiache -One finger width anterior and superior to the lower angle of the mandible, at the prominence of
masseter muscle.
ST7 Xiaguan -Anterior to the ear, with mouth closed, in the depression at the lower border of the zygomatic arch,
anterior to the condyloid process of the mandible.
ST8 Touwei -At the corner of the forehead, 0.5 cun within the hairline at the corner of the forehead, 4.5 cun lateral
to the midline at GV24.
ST9 Renying -Level with the tip of the Adam's Apple on the anterior border of the SCM. Avoid puncturing
common carotid artery.
ST10 Shuitu -Midway between ST9 and ST11 at the anterior border of the SCM.
ST11 Qishe -At the superior border of the medial end of the clavicle between the sternal head and th e clavicular
head of the SCM.
ST12 Quepen -In the midpoint of the supraclavicular fossa 4 cun lateral to the midline.
ST13 Qihu -In the infraclavicular fossa, 4 cun lateral to the midline, below ST12.
ST14 Kufang -4 cun lateral to the midline i n the 1st intercostal space.
ST15 Wuyi -4 cun lateral to the midline in the 2nd intercostal space.
ST16 Yingchuang -4 cun lateral to the midline in the 3rd intercostal space.
ST17 Ruzhong -4 cun lateral to the midline in the 4th intercostal sp ace in the center of the nipple.
Contraindicated to needle and moxabustion! Landmark Only! Do Not Treat!
ST18 Rugen -4 cun lateral to the midline in the 5th intercostal space.
ST19 Burong -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV14, 6 cun above the umbilicus.
ST20 Chengman -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV13, 5 cun above the umbilicus.
ST21 Liangmen -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV12, 4 cun above the umbilicus.
ST22 Guanmen -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV11, 3 c un above the umbilicus.
ST23 Taiyi -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV10, 2 cun above the umbilicus.
ST24 Huaroumen -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV9, 1 cun above the umbilicus.
-12-
ST25 Tianshu -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral t o CV8 at the level of the umbilicus.
ST26 Wailing -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV7, 1 cun below the umbilicus.
ST27 Daju -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV5, 2 cun below the umbilicus.
ST28 Shuidao -2 cun lateral to the midline l ateral to CV4, 3 cun below the umbilicus.
ST29 Guilai -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV3, 4 cun below the umbilicus.
ST30 Qichong -2 cun lateral to the midline lateral to CV2, level with symphysis pubis.
ST31 Biguan -With the thigh flexed, in the depression lateral to the sartorius muscle, directly inferior to the anterior
superior iliac spine (ASIS).
ST32 Futu -6 cun above the superior lateral border of the patella on line connecting the ASIS.
ST33 Yinshi -3 cun above the superior late ral border of the patella on line connecting the ASIS found with knee
flexed.
ST34 Liangqiu -2 cun above the superior lateral border of the patella on line connecting the ASIS found with knee
flexed.
ST35 Dubi -Below the patella in a depression lateral to the patella ligament found with knee flexed.
ST36 Zusanli -3 cun below ST35 one finger width lateral from the anterior crest of the tibia, in the tibialis anterior
muscle.
ST37 Shangjuxu -3 cun below ST36 one finger width lateral from the anterior crest of the tibia.
ST38 Tiaokou -5 cun below ST36 one finger width lateral from the anterior crest of the tibia.
ST39 Xiajuxu -1 cun below ST38 one finger width lateral from the anterior crest of the tibia.
ST40 Fenglung -8 cun superior to the tip of the external malleous, one finger width lateral to ST38.
ST41 Jiexi -On the dorsum of the foot at the midpoint of the transverse crease of the ankle joint, approximately
level with the tip of the external malleolus in a depression between the extensor digitorum longus and hallucis
longus tendons.
ST42 Chongyang -On the dorsum of the foot, 1.5 cun inferior to ST41, in the depression between the second and
third metatarsals and cuneiform bone. Avoid the dorsal artery when needling.
ST43 Xiangu -In adepression distal to the junction of the 2nd and 3rd metatarsal bones.
ST44 Neiting -At the proximal end of the web between the 2nd and 3rd toes in the depression distal and lateral to
the 2nd metatarsodigital joint.
ST45 Lidui -0.1 cun posterior to th e corner of nail on the lateral side of the 2nd toe.
-13-
Spleen Meridian (SP)
The Foot Greater Yin (Tai Yin) of the Spleen 21 points
The spleen of the Foot -Taiyin starts from the medial aspect of the tip of the big toe. It travels along the medial aspect
ofthe foot at the junction between the red and white skin, ascends anteriorly to the medial malleolus up to the
medial aspect of the leg. Passing through the anterior medial aspect of the thigh, it enters the inguinal region
traveling along the anterior of t he abdomen. It then curves lateral to the midline to the intercostal space up to the 2nd
intercostal space. Then turns inferior to midway between the axilla and the free end of the eleventh rib.
Command Points
Water SP9
Metal SP5 Sedation Pt
Earth SP3 H orary Pt
Fire SP2 Tonification Pt
Wood SP1
Luo SP4
Xi-Cleft SP8
Source SP3
Spleen -Earth Element
Correspondences
Color Yellow
Flavor Sweet
Sense Mouth
Emotion Worry
Tissue Muscles
Climate Humidity
Sounds Singing
Odor Fragrant
Season Autumn
Direction Cent er

-14-
Spleen Meridian (SP)
Cardinal Points
SP6 Lower Abdomen, Sexual Organs, Skin and Parasympathetic Nervous System
SP10 Blood Sugars (diabetes)
SP21 Master Luo point, Whole Body Weakness and Pain
Point Locations:
SP1 YinBai -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail, on the medial side of the great toe.
SP2 Dadu -On medial side of the great toe, distal and inferior to the 1st metatarsophalangeal joint in a depression at
the juncture of the red and white skin.
SP3 Taibai -Proximal and inferior t o the head of the 1st metatarsal bone in a depression at the junction of the red
and white skin.
SP4 Gongsun -In a depression distal and inferior to the 1st metatarsal bone at the junction of the red and white skin.
SP5 Shangqui -In a depression distal and inferior to the medial malleolus, midway between the tuberosity of the
navicular bone and the tip of the medial malleolus.
SP6 Sanyinjiao -3 cun directly above the tip of the medial malleolus on the posterior border of the tibia.
Contraindicated to needle during pregnancy.
SP7 Lougu -6 cun from the tip of the medial malleolus on line connecting tip of medial malleolus and SP9 on the
posterior border of the tibia (3 cun above SP6)
SP8 Diji -3 cun below SP9 on line connecting SP9 and medial malleo lus.
SP9 Yinlingquan -On the lower border of the medial condyle of the tibia, in the depression between the posterior
border of the tibia and gastrocnemius muscle.
SP10 Xuehai -With the knee in flexion, 2 cun superior to the superior border of the pat ella, on the bulge of the
medial portion of the quadriceps femoris muscle.
SP11 Jimen -6 cun above SP10 on the line connecting SP12 and SP10.
SP12 Chongmen -3.5 cun lateral to the midline at CV2, in the inguinal region, on the lateral side of the femor al
artery. Avoid femoral artery when needling!
SP13 Fushe -0.7 cun laterosuperior to SP12 and 4 cun lateral to the anterior midline.
SP14 Fujie -1.3 cun below SP15 and 4 cun lateral to the anterior midline, on lateral side of rectus abdominis
muscle.
SP15 Daheng -4 cun lateral to the center of the umbilicus, lateral to rectus abdominus muscle.
SP16 Fuai -3 cun above SP15 and 4 cun lateral to the anterior midline at CV11.
SP17 Shidou -6 cun lateral to the anterior midline in the 5th intercostal spa ce.
SP18 Tianxi -6 cun lateral to the anterior midline in the 4th intercostal space.
SP19 Xiongxiang -6 cun lateral to the anterior midline in the 3rd intercostal space.
SP20 Zhourong -6 cun lateral to the anterior midline in the 2nd intercostal spac e.
SP21 Dabao -On the midaxillary line, 6 cun inferior to the anterior axillary crease. Midway between the axilla and
the free end of the eleventh rib.
-15-HeartMeridian(HT,HE)
TheHandLesserYin(ShaoYin)oftheHeart9points
TheheartchanneloftheHand-Shaoyinstartsinthecenterofaxilla.Fromthereisgoesalongtheposteriorborderofthemedial
aspectoftheupperarm.Passingthroughthecubitalregion,itdescendstothepisiformregionproximaltothepalmandenters
thepalm.Thenitendsatthemedialaspectofthetipofthelittlefinger.

-16-
Heart Meridian (HT, HE)
The Hand Lesser Yin (Shao Yin) of the Heart 9 points
Command Points
Water HT3
Metal HT4
Earth HT7 Sedation Pt
Fire HT8 Horary Pt
Wood HT9 Tonification Pt
Luo HT5
Xi-Cleft HT6
Source HT7Heart -Fire Element
Correspondences
Color Red
Flavor Bitter
Sense Tongue
Emotion Joy
Tissue Pulse
Climate Heat
Sounds Laughing
Odor Scorched
Season Summer
Direction South
Cardinal Points
HT7 Emotions and Anxiety with Palpitations
Point L ocations:
HT1 Jiquan -Center of axilla on the medial side of the axillary artery. Avoid axillary artery!
HT2 Qingling -With elbow flexed, the point is found 3 cun above the medial end of the transverse cubital crease in
the groove medial to the biceps brachii.
HT3 Shaohai -With elbow flexed, at the medial end of the transverse cubital crease.
HT4 Lingdao -With the palm facing up, the point is found 1.5 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist at HT7.
HT5 Tongli -1 cun above HT7 on a line con necting HT3 and HT7.
HT6 Yinxi -0.5 cun above HT7 on a line connecting HT3 and HT7.
HT7 Shenmen -On the ulnar end of the transverse crease of the wrist, in the small depression between the pisiform
and ulna bones.
HT8 Shaofu -With a fist made, where the little finger falls between the 4th and 5th metacarpal bones.
HT9 Shaochong -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the radial side of the little finger.
Small Intestine Meridian (SI)
The Hand Greater Yang (Tai Yang) of the Small Intestine 19 points
The small intestine channel of the Hand -Taiyang starts at the ulnar aspect of the tip of the little finger, and travels
along the ulnar border of the hand dorsum upward to the posterior border of the lateral aspect of the upper arm. It
passes th rough the cubital region curving around the scapular region. Then turning downward to the supraclavicular
fossa and ascends to the neck. Travels up to the cheek going through the outer canthus of the eye, and ends anterior
to the tragus of the ear.
Cardin al Points
SI11 Scapula and Shoulder
-17-
Small Intestine Meridian (SI)
Command Points
Earth SI8 Sedation Pt
Fire SI5 Horary Pt
Wood SI3 Tonification Pt
Water SI2
Metal SI1
Luo SI7
Xi-Cleft SI6
Source SI4
Small Intestine
Fire Element
Correspondences
Color Red
Flavor Bitter
Sense Tongue
Emotion Joy
Tissue Pulse
Climate Heat
Sounds Laughing
Odor Scorched
Season Summer
Direction South

-18-
Small Intestine Meridian (SI)
The Hand Greater Yang (Tai Yang) of the Small Intestine 19 points
Point Locations:
SI1 Shao ze-0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the ulnar side of the little finger.
SI2 Qiangu -With a loose fist made the point is found on the ulnar side of the fifth digit, in the depression distal to
the metacarpophalangeal joint, at the junctio n of the red and white skin.
SI3 Houxi -With a loose fist made, inthe depression proximal to the head of the fifth metacarpal bone, at the
junction of the red and white skin.
SI4 Wangu -On the ulnar edge of the palm, in the depression between the fif th metacarpal bone and the hamate and
pisiform bones.
SI5 Yanggu -Near the ulnar end of the transverse wrist crease on the dorsal side of the hand in a depression between
the styloid process of the ulna and the triquetral bone.
SI6 Yanglao -On the dors al side of the wrist, in the bony cleft on the radial side of the styloid process of the ulna.
SI7 Zhizheng -5 cun above SI5 on a line connecting SI5 and SI8, between the anterior border of the ulna and flexor
carpi ulnaris muscle.
SI8 Xiaohai -With e lbow flexed, in a depression between the olecranon process of the ulna and the medial
epicondyle of the humerus.
SI9 Jianzhen -With arm abducted, 1 cun above the posterior end of the axillary fold, posterior and inferior to the
shoulder joint.
SI10 Naos hu-With arm abducted, directly above SI9 in a depression inferior to scapular spine.
SI11 Tianzong -In the depression of the infrascapular fossa, one -third the distance between the lower border of the
scapular spine and the inferior angle of the scapul a, approximately level with T4 spinous process.
SI12 Bingfeng -Above SI11 in the center of the suprascapular fossa, in a depression when arm is lifted.
SI13 Quyaun -On the medial extremity of the suprascapular fossa, about midway between SI10 and the s pinous
process of T2.
SI14 Jianwaishu -3 cun lateral to the lower border of the spinous process of T1 (GV13).
SI15 Jianzhongzhu -2 cun lateral from the posterior midline below the spinous process of C7 (GV14).
SI16 Tianchuang -On lateral neck posteri or to SCM, posterior and superior to LI18 level with the adams apple.
SI17 Tianrong -Posterior to the angle of the mandible in a depression on the anterior border of the SCM.
SI18 Quanliao -Directly below the outer canthus of the eyein a depression on the lower border of the zygoma.
Contraindicated to moxabustion!
SI19 Tinggong -Anterior to the tragus and posterior to the condyloid process of the mandible in a depression
formed when mouth is opened.
-19-
Bladder Meridian (BL, UB)
The Foot Greater Yang (Tai Yang) of the Bladder 67 points
The urinary bladder channel of the Foot -Taiyang originates from the inner canthus of the eye. Passing through the
forehead, it flows up to the vertex. It bifurcates above the posterior hairline into two lines. One line runs from the
posterior aspect of the neck downward along the medial border of the scapula (3 cun lateral to the back mid -line).
Passing through the gluteal region. Another line runs straight downward (1.5 cun lateral to the mid -line of the back)
to the l umbar region. From there it descends along the posterior aspect of the thigh to the popliteal fossa.
Descending to the posterior aspect of the gastrocnemius muscle and further to the posterior inferior aspect of the
lateral malleolus. Ending at lateral pos terior side of the tip of the little toe.
Command Points
Earth BL54
Fire BL60
Wood BL65 Sedation Pt
Water BL66 Horary Pt
Metal BL67 Tonification Pt
Luo BL58
Xi-Cleft BL63
Source BL64Bladder -Water Element
Correspondences
Color Blue/Black
Flavor Salty
Sense Ears
Emotion Fear
Tissue Bones
Climate Cold
Sounds Groaning
Odor Putrid
Season Winter
Direction North
Cardinal Points
BL11 Bones
BL17 Blood and Blood Chemistries
BL54 Low Back, Sacrum and Leg
BL60 Upper Back, Leg and Foot
BL67 Malpositioned Fetus
Point Locations:
BL1 Jingming -0.1 cun superior to the inner canthus of the eye in a depression.
BL2 Zanzhu -In the supraorbital notch at the medial end of the eyebrow.
BL3 Meichong -0.5 cun within the anterior hairline directly above BL2 and 0.5 cu n lateral to GV24.
BL4 Quchai -1.5 cun lateral to GV24 and 0.5 cun within the anterior hairline.
BL5 Wuchu -0.5 cun above BL4 or 1 cun above the anterior hairline and 1.5 cun lateral to GV23.
BL6 Chengguang -1.5 cun posterior to BL5 and 2.5 cun above the anterior hairline, 1.5 cun lateral to the midline.
-20-
Bladder Meridian (BL)

-21-
Point Locations:
BL7 Tongtian -1.5 cun posterior to BL6 and 4 cun above the anterior hairline, 1.5 lateral to the midline.
BL8 Luoque -1.5 cun poste rior to BL7, 1.5 cun lateral to the midline.
BL9 Yuzhen -1.3 cun lateral to GV17, on the lateral side of the superior border of the external occipital
protuberance.
BL10 Tianzhu -1.3 cun lateral to GV15 and 0.5 cun above the posterior hairline, in a depression on the lateral
aspect of the trapezius muscle.
BL11 Dazhu -1.5 cun lateral to GV13 level with the spinous process of T1. (from the midline to the medial border
of the scapula is considered 3 cun)
BL12 Fengmen -1.5 cun lateral to midline le vel with the spinous process of T2.
BL13 Feishu -1.5 cun lateral to GV12 level with the spinous process of T3.
BL14 Jueyinshu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of T4.
BL15 Xinshu -1.5 cun lateral to GV11 level with the spinou s process of T5.
BL16 Dushu -1.5 cun lateral to GV10 level with the spinous process of T6.
BL17 Geshu -1.5 cun lateral to GV9 level with the spinous process of T7.
BL18 Gan Shu -1.5 cun lateral to GV8 level with the spinous process of T9.
BL19 D anshu -1.5 cun lateral to GV7 level with the spinous process of T10.
BL20 Pishu -1.5 cun lateral to GV6 level with the spinous process of T11.
BL21 Weishu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of T12.
BL22 Sanjiaoshu -1.5 cu n lateral to GV5 level with the spinous process of L1.
BL23 Shenshu -1.5 cun lateral to GV4 level with the spinous process of L2.
BL24 Qihaishu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of L3.
BL25 Dachangshu -1.5 cun lateral to GV3 level with the spinous process of L4.
BL26 Guanyuanshu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of L5.
BL27 Xiaochangshu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the first posterior sacral foramen.
BL28 Pangguangshu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the second posterior sacral foramen.
BL29 Zhonglushu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the third posterior sacral foramen.
BL30 Baihuanshu -1.5 cun lateral to midline level with the fourth posterior sacral foramen.
BL31 S hangliao -In the first posterior sacral foramen.
BL32 Ciliao -In the second posterior sacral foramen.
BL33 Zhongliao -In the third posterior sacral foramen.
-22-
BL34 Xialiao -In the fourth posterior sacral foramen.
BL35 Huiyang -0.5 cun lateral to either side of the tip of the coccyx.
BL36 Fufen (AKA BL41) -3 cun lateral to the midline level with the spinous process of T2 on the spinal border of
the scapula.
BL37 Pohu (AKA BL42) -3 cun lateral to GV12 level with the spinous process of T3 on the spinal border of the
scapula.
BL38 Gaohuanshu (AKA BL43) -3 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of T4
BL39 Shentang (AKA BL44) -3 cun lateral to GV11 level with the spinous process of T5
BL40 Yixi (AKA BL45) -3 cun lateral to G V10 level with the spinous process of T6
BL41 Geguan (AKA BL46) -3 cun lateral to GV9 level with the spinous process of T7
BL42 Hunmen (AKA BL47) -3 cun lateral to GV8 level with the spinous process of T9
BL43 Yanggang (AKA BL48) -3 cun lateral to GV7 level with the spinous process of T10
BL44 Yishe (AKA BL49) -3 cun lateral to GV6 level with the spinous process of T11
BL45 Weicang (AKA BL50) -3 cun lateral to midline level with the spinous process of T12
BL46 Huangmen (AKA BL51) -3 cun lat eral to GV5 level with the spinous process of L1
BL47 Zhishi (AKA BL52) -3 cun lateral to GV4 level with the spinous process of L2
BL48 Baohuang (AKA BL53) -3 cun lateral to the midline, at the level of the second sacral foramen.
BL49 Zhibian (AKA BL 54)-3 cun lateral to the midline, at the level of the fourth sacral foramen.
BL50 Chengfu (AKA BL36) -On the posterior side of the thigh at the midpoint of the inferior gluteal crease.
BL51 Yinmen (AKA BL37) -On the posterior thigh, 6 cun inferior t o BL50, on a line joining BL50 and BL54.
BL52 Fuxi (AKA BL38) -With the knee in slight flexion, in the popliteal fossa, 1 cun superior to BL53 and on the
medial side of biceps femoris tendon
BL53 Weiyang (AKA BL39) -Lateral to BL54 at the popliteal cre ase and medially to the biceps femoris tendon.
BL54 Weizhong (AKA BL40) -Midpoint of the transverse crease of the popliteal fossa between the biceps femoris
and semitendinosus tendons.
BL55 Heyang -2 cun directly below BL54 between the medial and la teral heads of the gastrocnemius muscle on
line connecting BL54 and BL57.
BL56 Chengjin -On the posterior leg, 5 cun inferior to BL54, in the center of the gastrocnemius muscle, along the
line connecting BL54 and BL57.
BL57 Chengshan -In a depression below the gastrocnemius muscle, 8 cun inferior to BL54.
BL58 Feiyang -7 cun above BL60 on the posterior border of the fibula about 1 cun lateral and inferior to BL57.
BL59 Fuyang -3 cun directly above BL60.
-23-
BL60 Kunlun -In a depression between the t ip of the lateral malleolus and the Achilles tendon.
Contraindicated to needle during pregnancy.
BL61 Pucan -Posterior and inferior to the lateral malleolus, directly below BL60, ina depression on the lateral
calcaneus.
BL62 Shenmai -In a depression d irectly below the lateral malleolus.
BL63 Jinmen -Anterior and inferior to BL62, inthe depression posterior to the fifth metatarsal bone.
BL64 Jinggu -Below the tuberosity of the 5th metatarsal bone at the junction of the red and white skin.
BL65 Shu gu-Posterior to the head of the 5th metatarsal bone at the junction of the red and white skin.
BL66 Zutonggu -In a depression anterior to the 5th metatarsophalangeal joint.
BL67 Zhiyin -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the lateral side of the small toe. Contraindicated to
needle during pregnancy.
Kidney Meridian (KI)
The Foot Lesser Yin (Shao Yin) of the Kidney 27 points
The kidney channel of the Foot -Shaoyin starts from the interior aspect of the little toe (On the sole of the foot,
depending on the text.), and runs through a depression in the lower aspect of the tuberosity of the navicular bone. It
travels behind the medial malleolus and encircles the malleolus. Ascending along the medial side of the leg, it passes
the medial side of the popliteal fossa and goes further upward along the posterior -medial aspect of the thigh.
Traveling to the superior border of the symphysis pubis forming a straight line 0.5 cun from the midline. It ascends
diverging at the diaphragm, ending ina depres sion on lower border of clavicle 2 cun from the midline.
Point Locations:
KI1 Yongquan -On the sole of the foot, in a depression when the foot is in plantar flexion at the junction of the
anterior 1/3 and posterior 2/3 of line connecting base of 2nd and 3rd toes and the heel.
KI2 Rangu -Anterior and Inferior to the medial malleolus in a depression on the lower border of the tuberosity of
the navicular bone.
KI3 Taixi -In depression midway between the tip of the medial malleolus and the attachment of the Achilles tendon,
level with the tip of the medial malleolus.
KI4 Dazhong -Posterior and inferior to the medial malleolus in a depression anterior to the medial attachment of the
Achilles tendon.
KI5 Shuiquan -1 cun directly below KI3 in a depressio n anterior and superior to the medial tuberosity of the
calcaneus.
KI6 Zhaohai -In a depression 1 cun below the tip of the medial malleolus.
KI7 Fuliu -2 cun above KI3 on the anterior border of the Achilles tendon.
KI8 Jiaoxin -0.5 cun anterior to KI 7, 2 cun above KI3, posterior to the medial border of the tibia.
KI9 Zhubin -5 cun above KI3 on the line drawn from KI3 to KI10 at the lower border of the gastrocnemius muscle.
KI10 Yingu -At the medial side of the popliteal fossa when the knee is flex ed, between the tendons of
semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscles level with BL54.
-24-
Kidney Meridian (KI)
Command Points
Water KI10 Horary Pt
Metal KI7 Tonification Pt
Earth KI3
Fire KI2
Wood KI1 Sedation Pt
Luo KI4
Xi-Cleft KI5
Source KI3
Kidney
Water Element
Correspondences
Color Blue/Black
Flavor Salty
Sense Ears
Emotion Fear
Tissue Bones
Climate Cold
Sounds Groaning
Odor Putrid
Season Winter
Direction North
Cardinal Points
KI27 Neurological Confusion, Master Associated Pt .

-25-
Point Location s:
KI11 Henggu -At the superior border of the symphysis pubis, 5 cun below CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV2. (CV8 is at
the center of the umbilicus)
KI12 Dahe -4 cun below CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV3.
KI13 Qixue -3 cun below CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV4.
KI14 Siman -2 cun below CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV5.
KI15 Zhongzhu -1 cun below CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV7.
KI16 Huanshu -0.5 cun lateral to CV8 at the umbilicus.
KI17 Shangqu -2 cun above CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV10.
KI18 Shiguan -3 cun above CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV11.
KI19 Yindu -4 cun above CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV12.
KI20 Futonggu -5 cun above CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV13.
KI21 Youmen -6 cun above CV8, 0.5 cun lateral to CV14. Avoid liver when needling!
KI22 Bulang -In 5th int ercostal space 2 cun lateral to CV16. Avoid heart when needling!
KI23 Shenfeng -In 4th intercostal space 2 cun lateral to CV17. Avoid heart when needling!
KI24 Lingxu -In 3rd intercostal space 2 cun lateral to CV18. Avoid heart when needling!
KI25 She ncang -In 2nd intercostal space 2 cun lateral to CV19. Avoid heart when needling!
KI26 Yuzhong -In 1st intercostal space 2 cun lateral to CV20.
KI27 Shufu -In depression on lower border of clavicle, 2 cun lateral to the midline.
-26-
PericardiumMeridian(P,PC)
TheHandTerminalYin(JueYin)ofthePericardium9points
ThepericardiumchanneloftheHand-Jueyinoriginatesinthechestlateraltothenipple.Itthenascendstotheaxillaryfossaand
runsalongthemedialaspectoftheupperarm,passingthroughthecubitalfossa.Itgoesfurtherdownwardtotheforearm
betweenthetendonsofthem.palmarislongusandm.flexorcarpiradialis.Itentersthepalmandpassesalongthemiddle
fingertoitstip.

-27-
Pericardium Meridian (P, PC)
The Hand Termin al Yin (Jue Yin) of the Pericardium 9 points
Command Points
Water P3
Metal P5
Earth P7 Sedation Pt
Fire P8 Horary Pt
Wood P9 Tonification Pt
Luo P6
Xi-Cleft P4
Source P7Pericardium -Fire Element
Correspondences
Color Red
Flavor Bitter
Sense Tongue
Emoti on Joy
Tissue Pulse
Climate Heat
Sounds Laughing
Odor Scorched
Season Summer
Direction South
Cardinal Points
P6 Chest and Digestion
Point Locations:
P1 Tianchi -5 cun lateral to the anterior midline or 1 cun lateral to the nipple in the fourth interco stal space. Deep
needle not advised.
P2 Tianquan -2 cun below the anterior axillary fold between the 2 heads of the biceps brachii.
P3 Quze -On the transverse cubital crease, at the ulnar side of the biceps brachii tendon.
P4 Ximen -5 cun above the t ransverse crease of the wrist P7, between the palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis
tendons, on the line connecting P3 and P7.
P5 Jianshi -3 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist P7, between palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis
tendons, o n the line connecting P3 and P7.
P6 Neiguan -2 cun above the transverse crease of the wrist P7, between palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis
tendons, on the line connecting P3 and P7.
P7 Daling -In the middle of the transverse crease of the wrist between palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis
tendons.
P8 Laogong -On the transverse crease of the palm just below where the tip of the middle finger rest when a fist is
made. Between the 2nd and 3rd metacarpal bones.
P9 Zhongchong -In the center o f the tip of the middle finger. For graphing measurement, 0.1 cun posterior lateral to
the corner of the nail.
Triple Warmer (San Jiao) Meridian (TW, TB, SJ)
The Hand Lesser Yang (Shao Yang) of the San Jiao 23 points
The sanjiao channel of the Hand -Shaoyang originates from the tip of the ring finger. It travels upward between the
fourth and fifth metacarpal bones and along the dorsal side of the wrist and the lateral side of the forearm between
the radius and ulna, it passes through the olecranon. Then it runs along the lateral aspect of the upper arm and
reaches the shoulder region. Crossing over the shoulder, it enters the supraclavicular fossa. It then ascends to the
neck, running along the posterior border of the ear. It crosses from the superior asp ect of the ear to the corner of the
forehead. Then it turns downward to the cheek and terminates inthe depression at the lateral end of the eyebrow.
-28-
Triple Warmer
(San Jiao) Meridian
(TW, TB, SJ)
Command Points
Earth TW10 Sedation Pt
Fire TW6 Horary Pt
Wood TW3 Tonification Pt
Water TW2
Metal TW1
Luo TW5
Xi-Cleft TW7
Source TW4
Triple Warmer
Fire Element
Correspondences
Color Red
Flavor Bitter
Sense Tongue
Emotion Joy
Tissue Pulse
Climate Heat
Sounds Laughing
Odor Scorched
Season Summer
Direction South
Cardinal Points
TW5 Hand, Arm, Neck
and Ear

-29-
Triple Warmer (San Jiao) Meridian (TW, TB, SJ)
The Hand Lesser Yang (Shao Yang) of the San Jiao 23 points
Point Locations:
TW1 Guanchong -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the ulnar side of the fourth digit.
TW2 Yemen -0.5 cun proximal to the margin of the web between the fourth and fifth digit.
TW3 Zhongzhu -With fist clenched, on the dorsum of the hand between the fourth and fifth metacarpal bones in a
depression proximal to the fou rth metacarpophalangeal joint.
TW4 Yangchi -On the transverse crease of the dorsum of the wrist between the tendons of muscles extensor
digitorum and extensor digiti minimi.
TW5 Waiguan -On the dorsum of the forearm, 2 cun above TW4 between the radius and the ulna.
TW6 Zhigou -On the dorsum of the forearm, 3 cun above the TW4 between the radius and the ulna.
TW7 Huizong -One finger width lateral to TW6 on the radial side of the ulna.
TW8 Sanyangluo -On the dorsum of the forearm 4 cun above TW4 be tween the radius and the ulna.
TW9 Sidu -On the dorsum of the forearm, 5 cun below the olecranon between the radius and the ulna.
TW10 Tianjing -1 cun superior to the olecranon in a depression formed with the elbow flexed.
TW11 Qinglengyuan -With the elbow flexed, 1 cun above TW10.
TW12 Xiaoluo -5 cun superior to the olecranon on a line midway between TW10 and TW14.
TW13 Naohui -3 cun below TW14 on the posterior border of the deltoid muscle, on the line joining the olecranon
and TW14.
TW14 Jianl iao-In the depression posterior and inferior to the acromion process, about 1 cun posterior to LI15.
TW15 Tianliao -Midway between GB21 and SI13 on the superior angle of the scapula.
TW16 Tianyou -Posterior and inferior to the mastoid process, on t he posterior border of the SCM muscle and level
with BL10.
TW17 Yifeng -Posterior to the lobule of the ear in a depression between the mandible and the mastoid process.
TW18 Qimai -In the center of the mastoid process at the junction of the middle and lower third of the curve formed
by TW17 and TW20, posterior to the helix.
TW19 Luxi -Posterior to the ear at the junction of the upper and middle third of the curve formed by TW17
and TW20, posterior to the helix.
TW20 Jiaosun -Directly above the ear apex just above the hairline.
TW21 Ermen -With the mouth open, in the depression anterior to the supratragic notch and posterior to the
mandibular condyloid process.
TW22 Erheliao -Anterior and superior to TW21, level with the root of the auricle on th e posterior border of the
hairline of the temple where the superficial temporal artery passes. Avoid artery when needling!
TW23 Sizhukong -In the depression at the lateral end of the eyebrow.
-30-
Gallbladder Meridian (GB)
Command Points
Earth GB34
Fire GB38 Sedation Pt
Wood GB41 Horary Pt
Water GB43 Tonification Pt
Metal GB44
Luo GB37
Xi-Cleft GB36
Source GB40
Gallbladder
Wood Element
Correspondences
Color Green
Flavor Sour
Sense Eyes
Emotion Anger
Tissue Tendons
Climate Wind
Sounds Shouting
Odor Ranci d
Season Spring
Direction East

-31-
Gall Bladder Meridian (GB)
The Foot Lesser Yang (Shao Yang) of the Gall bladder 44 points
The gall bladder channel of the Foot -Shaoyang starts from the outer canthus of the eye, and descends to the anterior
aspect of the ear. Then ascends to the corner of the forehead, and then winds downward posterior to the ear. Then
arches forward to the forehead at the midpoint of the eyebrow. It then runs above the hairline to the lateral side of
the neck. Travels highest point of the trapezius muscle. From there it further descends to the axilla and enters the
chest. It then travels interiorly in the hypochondriac region, emerging at the lateral side of the lower abdomen near
the femoral artery in the inguinal region. Then it curves a long the margin of the public hair and runs transversely
into the hip region. It then travels downward along the lateral side of thigh to the lateral side of the knee. Further
descending along the anterior aspect of the fibula, it reaches the lower end of the fibula, and the anterior aspect of
the lateral malleolus. Following the dorsum of the foot, it terminates at the lateral side of the fourth toe's tip.
Cardinal Points
GB20 All Cerebral Disorders
GB34 Muscles and Tendons
GB39 Bone Marrow
Point Locati ons:
GB1 Tongziliao -0.5 cun lateral to the outer canthus of the eye in a depression on the lateral side of the orbit.
GB2 Tinghui -Anterior to the intertragic notch at the posterior border of the condyloid process of the mandible with
the mouth open.
GB3 Shangguan -Anterior to the ear, in the depression directly above ST7 on the upper border of the zygomatic
arch.
GB4 Hanyan -Within the hairline at the junction of the upper 1/4 and lower 3/4 distance between ST8 and GB7.
GB5 Xuanlu -Within the ha irline midway between ST8 and GB7.
GB6 Xuanli -Within the hairline at the junction of the lower 1/4 and upper 3/4 distance between ST8 and GB7.
GB7 Qubin -Within the hairline, anterior and superior to the auricle, about 1 cun anterior to TW20.
GB8 Shu aigu -Superior to the apex of the auricle, 1.5 cun within the hairline.
GB9 Tianchong -0.5 cun posterior to GB8, 2 cun within the hairline directly above the posterior border of the
auricle.
GB10 Fubai -Posterior and superior to the mastoid process at the junction of the middle 1/3 and upper 1/3 of the
curve between GB9 and GB12.
GB11 Touqiaoyin -Posterior and superior to the mastoid process at the junction of the middle 1/3 and lower 1/3 of
the curve between GB9 and GB12 .
GB12 Wangu -In the depre ssion posterior and inferior to the mastoid process.
GB13 Benshen -0.5 cun within the hairline on the forehead, 3 cun lateral to GV4. Midway between ST8 and BL4.
GB14 Yangbai -On the forehead directly above the pupil, 1 cun above the midpoint of the ey ebrow.
GB15 Toulinqi -Directly above GB14, within the hairline, midway between GV24 and ST8.
GB16 Muchuang -1.5 cun posterior to GB15, 2 cun above the hairline and 2.25 cun lateral to GV22.
GB17 Zhengying -1.5 cun posterior to GB16, 3.5 cun above the hairline and 2.25 cun lateral to GV21.
GB18 Chengling -1.5 cun posterior to GB17, 5 cun above the hairline and 2.25 cun lateral to GV20.
-32-
GB19 Naokong -At the upper border of the external occipital protuberance, 2.5 cun lateral and level to GV17.
Direc tly above GB20.
GB20 Fengchi -In the depression created between the origins of the Sternocleidomastoid and Trapezius muscles, at
the junction of the occipital and nuchal regions. Lateral and level with GV16.
GB21 Jianjing -Midway between the spinous p rocess of C7 (GV14) and the acromion process at the highest point
of the trapezius muscle.
GB22 Yuanye -With the arm raised, 3 cun below the axilla on the midline in the 4th intercostal space, below HT1.
GB23 Zhejin -1 cun anterior to GB22 in the 4th i ntercostal space, level with the nipple.
GB24 Riyue -Directly below the nipple in the 7th intercostal space, inferior to LV14.
GB25 Jingmen -On the lateral side of the abdomen, at the lower border of the free end of the 12th rib.
GB26 Daimai -Directl y below LV13 at the free end of the 11th rib level with the umbilicus (CV8)
GB27 Wushu -On the lateral side of the abdomen, anterior to the ASIS, 3 cun below the level of umbilicus, lateral
to CV4.
GB28 Weidao -Anterior and inferior to the ASIS, 0.5 cu n anterior and inferior to GB27.
GB29 Juliao -In a depression at the midpoint between the ASIS and the greater trochanter of the femur.
Indications: Cystitis, Diarrhea, Endometriosis, Leg Pain, Leg Paralysis, Lumbar Pain, Orchitis, Paralysis, Sciatica.
GB30 Huantiao -At the junction of the lateral 1/3 and medial 2/3 of the distance between the greater trochanter and
the hiatus of the sacrum (GV2)
GB31 Fengshi -7 cun above the transverse popliteal crease on the lateral midline of thigh, where the tip of the
middle finger touches when the patient is standing and hands are at their sides.
GB32 Zhongdu -At the lateral side of the thigh 5 cun above the transverse popliteal crease between vastus lateralis
and biceps femoris muscles, 2 cun below GB31.
GB33 Xiyangguan -On the lateral side of the thigh 3 cun above the transverse popliteal crease in a depression
superior and posterior to the lateral condyle of the femur, between the femur and the tendon of biceps femoris.
GB34 Yanglingquan -In a depressio n anterior and inferior to the head of the fibula.
GB35 Yangjiao -7 cun above the tip of the lateral malleous on the posterior border of the fibula.
GB36 Waiqui -7 cun above the tip of the lateral malleous on the anterior border of the fibula.
GB37 Gu angming -5 cun above the tip of the lateral malleous on the anterior border of the fibula.
GB38 Yangfu -4 cun above and slightly anterior to the tip of the lateral malleous on the anterior border of the
fibula.
GB39 Xuanzhong -3 cun above the tip of t he lateral malleous in a depression between the posterior border of the
fibula and the tendons of peroneous longus and brevis muscles.
GB40 Qiuxu -Anterior and inferior to the lateral malleous in a depression on the lateral side of the extensor
digitorum longus tendon.
GB41 Zulinqi -On the dorsum of the foot, in the depression between the fourth and fifth metatarsal bones.
-33-
GB42 Diwuhui -Posterior to the 4th metatarsophalangeal joint between the fourth and fifth metatarsal bones,
on the medial side of the tendon of extensor digiti minimi.
GB43 Xiaxi -On the dorsum of the foot between the fourth and fifth metatarsals 0.5 cun proximal to the margin of
the web at the junction of the red and white skin.
GB44 Zuqiaoyin -0.1 cun posterior to the corner of the nail on the lateral side of the fourth toe.
Liver Meridian (LV)
The Foot Terminal Yin (Jue Yin) of the Liver 14 points
The liver channel of the Foot -Jueyin originates on the lateral side of the great toe. Ascending along the dorsum of
the foot, it flows further upward to the anterior aspect of the medial malleolus. Then it runs upward to the medial
side of the knee and along the medial aspect of the thigh into the pubic region. From there it curves around the
external genitalia and crosses the midli ne up to the lower abdomen. Ending directly below the nipple.
Cardinal Points
LV2 Lymphatics
LV3 Nervous System, Blood Pressure
LV13 Yin Organs
Point Locations:
LV1 Dadun -On the lateral side of the great toe, 0.1 cun from the corner of the nail.
LV2 Xingjian -On dorsum of the foot between the 1st and 2nd toes, proximal to the margin of the web at the
junction of the red and white skin.
LV3 Taichong -On dorsum of the foot in a depression distal to the junction of the 1st and 2nd metatarsal bones .
LV4 Zhongfeng -1 cun anterior to the medial malleolus, midway between SP5 and ST41, in a depression on the
medial side of the tendon of tibialis anterior.
LV5 Ligou -5 cun above the tip of the medial malleolus on the medial side of the tibia.
LV6 Zh ongdu -7 cun above the tip of the medial malleolus and posterior to the medial tibia.
LV7 Xiguan -1 cun posterior to SP9, posterior and inferior to the medial condyle of the tibia in the upper portion of
the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle. In the depression of the medial border of the tibia.
LV8 Ququan -When the knee is flexed, the point is found above the medial end of the transverse popliteal crease,
posterior to the medial epicondyle of the tibia in a depression on the anterior border of t he insertions of the
semimembraneous and semitendoneous muscles.
LV9 Yinbao -4 cun above the medial epicondyle of the femur, between vastus medialis and sartorius muscles.
LV10 Zuwuli -3 cun below ST30 at the proximal end of the thigh on the lateral bo rder of adductor longus muscle.
LV11 Yinlian -2 cun below ST30, 2 cun from the midline at the proximal end of the thigh and on the lateral border
of adductor longus muscle.
LV12 Jimai -2.5 cun lateral and inferior to the superior border of the pubic sy mphysis. In the inguinal groove lateral
and inferior to ST30.
LV13 Zhangmen -On the lateral side of the abdomen below the free end of the 11th rib.
LV14 Qimen -Directly below the nipple, 4 cun lateral to the midline in the 6th intercostal groove.
-34-
Liver Meridian (LI)
Command Points
Water LV8 Tonification Pt
Metal LV4
Earth LV3
Fire LV2 Sedation Pt
Wood LV1 Horary Pt
Luo LV5
Xi-Cleft LV6
Source LV3
Liver -Wood Element
Correspondences
Color Green
Flavor Sour
Sense Eyes
Emotion Anger
Tissue Tendons
Climate Wind
Sounds Shouting
Odor Rancid
Season Spring
Direction East

-35-
Conception Vessel Meridian (CV, Ren)
The Directing Channel has 2 4points
The Ren channel starts on the midline between the anus and the scrotum in males. Between the anus and the
posterior labial commissure in females. It ascends anteriorly to the public region. Along the midline of the abdomen,
itflows upward reaches the throat. Flowing further upward, it ends in the depression in the center of the mentolabial
groove.
Cardinal Point s
CV5 Endocrine System
CV6 Lower Abdomen, Sexual Organs and Increase Energry.
CV12 Upper Abdomen, Yang Organs.
CV17 Chest, Center of Respiration.
Point Locations:
CV1 Huiyin -On the midline between the anus and the scrotum in males. Between the anus an d the posterior labial
commissure in females.
CV2 Qugu -On top of the notch in the center of the superior border of the pubic symphysis.
CV3 Zhongji -1 cun above CV2, on the midline, 4 cun inferior to the umbilicus.
CV4 Guanyuan -On the midline, 3 cu n inferior to the umbilicus.
CV5 Shimen -On the midline, 2 cun inferior to the umbilicus.
CV6 Qihai -On the midline, 1.5 cun inferior to the umbilicus.
CV7 Yinjiao -On the midline, 1 cun inferior to the umbilicus.
CV8 Shenque -In the center of t he umbilicus.
CV9 Shuifen -On the midline, 1 cun superior to the umbilicus.
CV10 Xiawan -On the midline, 2 cun superior to the umbilicus.
CV11 Jianliao -On the midline, 3 cun superior to the umbilicus.
CV12 Zhongwan -On the midline, 4 cun superi or to the umbilicus.
CV13 Shangwan -On the midline, 5 cun superior to the umbilicus.
CV14 Juque -On the midline, 6 cun superior to the umbilicus.
CV15 Jiuwei -On the midline, 7 cun superior to the umbilicus and inferior to the xiphoid process.
CV16 Zhongting -On the midline level with the 5th intercostal space at the sternocostal angle.
CV 17 Shanzhong -On the midline level with the 4th intercostal space midway between the nipples.
CV18 Yutang -On the midline level with the 3rd intercostal sp ace.
CV19 Zigong -On the midline level with the 2nd intercostal space.
CV20 Huagai -On the midline level with the 1st intercostal space.
CV21 Xuanji -On the manubrium midline, 1 cun below CV22
CV22 Tiantu -0.5 cun superior to the suprasternal notc h, in the center of the depression.
-36-
CV23 Lianquan -On the midline, in the depression superior to the hyoid bone.
CV24 Chengjiang -In the depression in the center of the mentolabial groove, below the middle of the lower lip.
Conception Vessel Meridia n (CV, Ren)

-37-
Governing Vessel (GV, DU)

-38-
Governing Vessel (GV, DU)
The Governing Channel has 28 points
The Du channel starts midway between the tip of the coccyx bone and the anus with patient lying prone. It then
flows upward inside the spinal colu mn to the nape of the neck, and ascends to the vertex. Along the forehead, it
descends to the nose bridge, then to the lips. Ending at the labial frenulum inside the upper lip.
Cardinal Points
GV4 Immune System
GV14 General Excess (Energy)
GV20 Skin, Sym pathetic Nervous System, Memory, Mental and Cerebral Disorders.
GV26 Unconsciousness, Obesity
Point Locations:
GV1 Changqiang -Midway between the tip of the coccyx bone and the anus with patient lying prone.
GV2 Yaoshu -In the sacral hiatus.
GV3 Yao yangguan -Below the spinous process of L4
GV4 Mingmen -Below the spinous process of L2
GV5 Xuanshu -Below the spinous process of L1
GV6 Jizhong -Below the spinous process of T11
GV7 Zhongshu -Below the spinous process of T10
GV8 Jinsuo -Belo w the spinous process of T9
GV9 Zhiyang -Below the spinous process of T7
GV10 Lingtai -Below the spinous process of T6
GV11 Shendao -Below the spinous process of T5
GV12 Shenzhu -Below the spinous process of T3
GV13 Taodao -Below the spinous process of T1
GV14 Dazhui -Below the spinous process of C7
GV15 Yamen -0.5 cun above the midpoint of the posterior hairline in a depression below the spinous process of C1
GV16 Fengfu -1 cun directly above the midpoint of the posterior hairline dire ctly below the external occipital
protuberance . In the depression between the trapezius muscles of both sides.
GV17 Naohu -Midway between GV16 and GV18, 1.5 cun above GV16
GV18 Qiangjian -Midway between GV16 and GV20, 1.5 cun above GV17
GV19 Houding -5.5 cun above the midpoint of the posterior hairline. Midway between GV18 and GV20, 1.5 cun
above GV18
GV20 Baihui -7 cun above the midpoint of the posterior hairline, 5 cun above midpoint of anterior hairline, midway
on a line connecting the apex of both ears.
GV21 Qianding -1.5 cun anterior to GV2 0. Midway between GV20 and GV22
-39-
GV22 Xinhui -2 cun posterior to the anterior hairline, 3 cun anterior to GV20
GV23 Shangxing -1 cun posterior to the anterior hairline, 0.5 cun posterior to GV24
GV24 Shenting -0.5 cun above the midpoint of the anterior hairline.
GV25 Suliao -On tip of nose
GV26 Renzhong -At junction of the upper and middle third of philtrum.
GV27 Duiduan -At junction of upper lip and philtrum.
GV28 Yinjiao -At junction of gum and frenulum of upper lip.

Diagnosis Methods

Diagnosis in
Chinese
Medicine
A Comprehensive Guide
FIRST EDITION
Giovanni Maciocia, CAc (Nanjing)
Acupuncturist and Medical Herbalist, UK
Visiting Associate Professor at the Nanjing University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Nanjing
Foreword by
Julian Scott, PhD, BAc, MBAcC
2
Private Practitioner, Bath, UK
CHURCHILL LIVINGSTONE
3
Table of Contents
Cover image
Title page
Copyright page
To the memory of my parents
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgements
Note on the translation of Chinese terms
How to use this book
Index of symptoms and signs
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
4
PART 1: DIAGNOSIS BY OBSERVATION
DIAGNOSIS BY OBSERVATION
INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1: OBSERVATION OF THE BODY, MIND AND
COMPLEXION
OBSERVATION OF THE BODY, MIND AND COMPLEXION
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1: OBSERVATION OF THE BODY SHAPE, PHYSIQUE
AND DEMEANOUR
INTRODUCTION
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO YIN AND YANG
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO THE FIVE
ELEMENTS
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO PRENATAL
AND POSTNATAL INFLUENCES
CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO BODY BUILD
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO PAIN AND
DRUG TOLERANCE
Chapter 2: OBSERVATION OF THE MIND, SPIRIT AND
EMOTIONS
INTRODUCTION
THE THREE ASPECTS OF THE SPIRIT
THE THREE CONDITIONS OF THE SPIRIT
5
THE SPIRIT AND CONSTITUTION
THE SPIRIT AND THE EMOTIONS
Chapter 3: OBSERVATION OF THE COMPLEXION COLOUR
INTRODUCTION
DOMINANT AND GUEST COLOURS
OBSERVATION OF DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF COMPLEXION
COLOUR
COMPLEXION COLOURS
Chapter 4: OBSERVATION OF BODY MOVEMENTS
HEAD
FACE
LIMBS AND BODY
SECTION 2: OBSERVATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
OBSERVATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 5: OBSERVATION OF HEAD, FACE AND HAIR
HEAD
FACE
HAIR
Chapter 6: OBSERVATION OF THE EYES
INTRODUCTION
6
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EYES
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE INTERNAL ORGANS AND THE
EYES
ASPECTS OF OBSERVATION OF THE EYES
OBSERVATION OF PATHOLOGICAL SIGNS OF THE EYE
Chapter 7: OBSERVATION OF THE NOSE
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE NOSE
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE NOSE AND THE INTERNAL
ORGANS
ABNORMAL COLOUR
SWOLLEN NOSE
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSTRILS)
DRY NOSTRILS
NOSEBLEED
POLYPS
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
Chapter 8: OBSERVATION OF LIPS MOUTH, PALATE, TEETH,
GUMS AND PHILTRUM
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE MOUTH AND LIPS
LIPS
MOUTH
PALATE
7
TEETH AND GUMS
PHILTRUM
Chapter 9: OBSERVATION OF THE EARS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EARS
EAR SIZE
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
SORES ON THE EAR
WARTS ON THE EAR
ABNORMAL COLOUR
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
Chapter 10: OBSERVATION OF THE THROAT AND NECK
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND NECK
THROAT
NECK
Chapter 11: OBSERVATION OF THE BACK
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BACK
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
SPINAL CURVE ABNORMALITIES
8
SKIN SIGNS
Chapter 12: OBSERVATION OF WOMEN’S BREASTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BREASTS
BREAST SIZE
BREAST LUMPS
NIPPLE ABNORMALITIES
PEAU D’ORANGE SKIN
Chapter 13: OBSERVATION OF THE HEARTBEAT
INTRODUCTION
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED DOWNWARDS
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED UPWARDS
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE LEFT
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE RIGHT
HEARTBEAT BELOW THE XYPHOID PROCESS
Chapter 14: OBSERVATION OF THE HANDS
INTRODUCTION
ABNORMAL COLOUR
VENULES ON THE THENAR EMINENCE
ATROPHY OF THE THENAR EMINENCE
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES OF THE DORSUM OF THE HANDS
TREMOR OF THE HANDS
9
TINEA (RINGWORM)
THE FINGERS
DEFORMED KNUCKLES
THE PALMS
Chapter 15: OBSERVATION OF THE NAILS
INTRODUCTION
SURFACE ABNORMALITIES
TWISTED NAILS
CURLING NAILS
NAILS FALLING OFF
ABNORMAL COLOUR
LUNULAE
CORRESPONDENCE OF NAILS TO ORGAN SYSTEMS
Chapter 16: OBSERVATION OF THE CHEST AND ABDOMEN
CHEST
ABDOMEN
Chapter 17: OBSERVATION OF THE GENITALIA
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE GENITALIA
PUBIC HAIR
PENIS
SCROTUM
VULVA AND VAGINA
10
Chapter 18: OBSERVATION OF THE FOUR LIMBS
INTRODUCTION
ATROPHY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
FLACCIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
RIGIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
PARALYSIS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
LIMB MOVEMENTS
OEDEMA OF THE FOUR LIMBS
SWELLING OF THE JOINTS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Chapter 19: OBSERVATION OF THE LEGS
LEG SIGNS
GAIT
Chapter 20: OBSERVATION OF THE EXCRETIONS
INTRODUCTION
SPUTUM
NASAL DISCHARGE
SWEAT
STOOLS
URINE
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Chapter 21: OBSERVATION OF THE SKIN
11
INTRODUCTION
THE SKIN AND THE INTERNAL ORGANS
SKIN SIGNS
SKIN DISEASES
Chapter 22: OBSERVATION IN CHILDREN
INTRODUCTION
COMPLEXION
ORIFICES
BODY MOVEMENT
SPINAL MUSCLES
INDEX FINGER
ROOT OF THE NOSE
SECTION 3: TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 23: TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
CONDITIONS FOR EXAMINING THE TONGUE
AREAS OF THE TONGUE
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TONGUE
Chapter 24: TONGUE-BODY COLOUR
TONGUE SPIRIT
12
TONGUE-BODY COLOURS
SUBLINGUAL VEINS
Chapter 25: TONGUE-BODY SHAPE
INTRODUCTION
THIN
SWOLLEN
PARTIALLY SWOLLEN
STIFF
FLACCID
LONG
SHORT
CRACKED
DEVIATED
MOVING
QUIVERING
TOOTHMARKED
Chapter 26: TONGUE COATING
PHYSIOLOGY OF TONGUE COATING
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF TONGUE COATING
PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF COATING
COATING WITH OR WITHOUT ROOT
COATING THICKNESS
COATING DISTRIBUTION
13
COATING MOISTURE
COATING TEXTURE
TONGUE COATING IN EXTERNAL DISEASES
Chapter 27: TONGUE IMAGES AND PATTERNS
QI-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
YANG-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
BLOOD-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
YIN-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
THE TONGUE IN PHLEGM AND DAMPNESS
THE TONGUE IN HEAT
THE TONGUE IN COLD
THE TONGUE IN QI AND BLOOD STAGNATION
THE TONGUE IN INTERNAL WIND
THE TONGUE IN EXTERNAL INVASIONS OF WIND
PART 2: DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 28: INTRODUCTION
NATURE OF DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
NATURE OF “SYMPTOMS” IN CHINESE MEDICINE
THE ART OF INTERROGATION: ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS
14
TERMINOLOGY PROBLEMS IN INTERROGATION
PATIENTS’ EXPRESSIONS
PITFALLS TO AVOID IN INTERROGATION
PROCEDURE FOR INTERROGATION
TIME SCALE OF SYMPTOMS
INTEGRATION OF INTERROGATION WITH OBSERVATION
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS AND INTERROGATION
TONGUE AND PULSE DIAGNOSIS: INTEGRATION WITH
INTERROGATION
THE 10 TRADITIONAL QUESTIONS
THE 16 QUESTIONS
Chapter 29: PAIN
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
AREA OF PAIN
NATURE OF PAIN
TIME OF PAIN
FACTORS AFFECTING PAIN
ORGAN VERSUS CHANNEL PAIN
Chapter 30: FOOD AND TASTE
INTRODUCTION
15
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
MAIN PATTERNS OF DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
FOOD
APPETITE
TASTE
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
BELCHING
SOUR REGURGITATION
Chapter 31: STOOLS AND URINE
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
STOOLS
URINE
Chapter 32: THIRST AND DRINK
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
THIRST
16
DRY MOUTH
PREFERENCE FOR HOT OR COLD DRINKS
ABSENCE OF THIRST
Chapter 33: ENERGY LEVELS
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
PATTERNS CAUSING TIREDNESS
Chapter 34: HEAD
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
HEADACHE
DIZZINESS
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
FAINTING
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE HEAD
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE HEAD
17
FEELING OF MUZZINESS (FUZZINESS) OF THE HEAD
BRAIN NOISE
FEELING OF COLD OF THE HEAD
FEELING OF HEAT OF THE HEAD
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE SKIN OF THE HEAD
ITCHY SCALP
Chapter 35: FACE
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
FACE
NOSE
TEETH AND GUMS
MOUTH AND LIPS
TONGUE
Chapter 36: THROAT AND NECK
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND NECK
THROAT
18
NECK
Chapter 37: BODY
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
ACHES IN THE WHOLE BODY
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
LOWER BACKACHE
NUMBNESS/TINGLING
ITCHING
LOSS OF WEIGHT
OBESITY
Chapter 38: CHEST AND ABDOMEN
CHEST
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
ABDOMEN
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
19
Chapter 39: LIMBS
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
WEAKNESS OF THE LIMBS
DIFFICULTY IN WALKING (ATROPHY/FLACCIDITY OF LIMBS
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE LIMBS
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LIMBS
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE LIMBS
GENERALIZED JOINT PAIN
TREMOR OF THE LIMBS
UPPER LIMBS
LOWER LIMBS
Chapter 40: SLEEP
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
INSOMNIA
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
SOMNOLENCE
20
Chapter 41: SWEATING
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SWEATING
PATHOLOGY OF SWEATING
CLASSIFICATION OF SWEATING
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
Chapter 42: EARS AND EYES
EARS
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
EYES
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
Chapter 43: FEELING OF COLD, FEELING OF HEAT AND FEVER
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
21
FEELING OF COLD
SIMULTANEOUS FEELING OF COLD AND FEVER IN EXTERIOR
CONDITIONS
ALTERNATING FEELING OF COLD AND FEELING OF HEAT
FEELING OF HEAT FROM INTERNAL CAUSES
INTERIOR FEVER
FIVE-PALM HEAT
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT IN INTERNAL
CONDITIONS
Chapter 44: MENTAL—EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
DEPRESSION
FEAR/ANXIETY
IRRITABILITY/ANGER
WORRY/OVERTHINKING
SADNESS/GRIEF
EXCESS JOY
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
Chapter 45: SEXUAL SYMPTOMS
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
22
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
MEN
WOMEN
Chapter 46: WOMEN’S SYMPTOMS
INTRODUCTION
WHY WE ASK
WHEN WE ASK
HOW WE ASK
THE GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY
BREAST SYMPTOMS
MENSTRUATION
PREGNANCY AND CHILDBIRTH
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Chapter 47: CHILDREN’S SYMPTOMS
INTRODUCTION
MOTHER’S PREGNANCY
CHILDBIRTH
POSTPARTUM PROBLEMS
CHILDHOOD DISEASES
DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
IMMUNIZATIONS
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND EARACHE
23
SLEEP
SLOW DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 48: DIAGNOSING THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
INTRODUCTION
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CAUSES OF DISEASE
THE FIVE STAGES OF LIFE
THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
PART 3: DIAGNOSIS BY PALPATION
DIAGNOSIS BY PALPATION
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 49: PULSE DIAGNOSIS
INTRODUCTION
THE ‘NINE REGIONS’ OF THE PULSE FROM THE ‘YELLOW
EMPEROR’S CLASSIC OF INTERNAL MEDICINE’
THE PULSE IN THE ‘CLASSIC OF DIFFICULTIES’
THE THREE SECTIONS OF THE PULSE
ASSIGNMENT OF PULSE POSITIONS TO ORGANS
THE THREE LEVELS
METHOD OF PULSE TAKING
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PULSE
ATTRIBUTES OF THE NORMAL PULSE
GUIDELINES FOR INTERPRETING THE PULSE
24
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
INTEGRATION OF PULSE AND TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
LIMITATIONS OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
Chapter 50: PULSE QUALITIES
Chapter 51: PALPATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
INTRODUCTION
PALPATION OF THE CHEST AND ABDOMEN
PALPATION OF THE SKIN
PALPATION OF HANDS AND FEET
PALPATION OF ACUPUNCTURE POINTS
Chapter 52: PALPATION OF CHANNELS
INTRODUCTION
CONNECTING CHANNELS
MUSCLE CHANNELS
PALPATION OF THE CHANNELS IN PAINFUL OBSTRUCTION
SYNDROME (BI)
PALPATION OF CHANNELS
PART 4: DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING AND SMELLING
DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING AND SMELLING
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 53: DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING
25
INTRODUCTION
VOICE
SPEECH
CRYING IN BABIES
BREATHING AND SIGHING
COUGHING AND SNEEZING
HICCUP
BELCHING
VOMITING
Chapter 54: DIAGNOSIS BY SMELLING
INTRODUCTION
BODY ODOUR
ODOUR OF BODILY SECRETIONS
PART 5: SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1: SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF PARTS OF THE BODY
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF PARTS OF THE BODY
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 55: HEAD, HAIR AND FACE
26
HEAD
Hair And Scalp
Face
Chapter 56: FACE COLOUR
WHITE/PALE
YELLOW
RED
BLUISH/GREENISH
PURPLE
DARK
SALLOW
BLUSHING
Chapter 57: EARS
TINNITUS/DEAFNESS
ITCHY EARS
EARACHE
BLEEDING FROM THE EARS
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
ABNORMAL SIZE
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
SORES ON THE EAR
WARTS ON THE EAR
27
ABNORMAL HELIX COLOUR
RED BACK OF THE EAR
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
SWELLING AND REDNESS OF THE CONCHA
Chapter 58: NOSE
ABNORMAL COLOUR
SNEEZING
BLOCKED NOSE
RUNNY NOSE
ITCHY NOSE
DRY NOSTRILS
NOSEBLEED
NOSE ACHE
NOSE PAIN
SWOLLEN NOSE
BAD SMELL
LOSS OF SENSE OF SMELL
POLYPS
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSTRILS)
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
Chapter 59: THROAT
SORE THROAT
28
REDNESS OF THE PHARYNX
REDNESS AND SWELLING OF THE PHARYNX
REDNESS AND EROSION OF THE PHARYNX
SWOLLEN TONSILS
PHLEGM IN THE THROAT
GOITRE (Swelling Of The Sides Of The Neck
ITCHY THROAT
DRY THROAT
HOARSE VOICE OR LOSS OF VOICE
WHITE PURULENT SPOTS IN THE THROAT
FEELING OF OBSTRUCTION OF THE THROAT
REDNESS ON THE THROAT
Chapter 60: MOUTH, TONGUE, TEETH, GUMS, LIPS, PALATE
AND PHILTRUM
MOUTH
TONGUE
TEETH
GUMS
LIPS
PALATE
PHILTRUM
Chapter 61: EYES
VISION
29
ITCHY EYES
DRY EYES
HOT AND PAINFUL EYES
STREAMING EYES
DISCHARGE FROM THE EYES
EYE COLOUR
EYELIDS
GLAUCOMA
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE EYES
EYEBALL
ECCHYMOSIS UNDER CONJUNCTIVA
RED VEINS/MEMBRANE
CORNEA
WHITE SPECKS
PUPILS
STARING, FIXED EYES
CLOSED EYES
OPEN EYES
INVERTED EYELASHES
CATARACT
Chapter 62: NECK, SHOULDERS AND UPPER BACK
NECK AND SHOULDERS
UPPER BACK
30
Chapter 63: CHEST
COUGH
BREATHLESSNESS
WHEEZING
PAIN
FEELINGS IN THE CHEST AND HEART
PALPITATIONS
DISPLACED HEARTBEAT
ABNORMAL CHEST SHAPE
GYNAECOMASTIA
YAWNING
SIGHING
Chapter 64: LIMBS
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
PAIN IN THE LIMBS
HANDS AND FEET
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE LIMBS
WEAKNESS AND ATROPHY
LIMB SWELLING
LIMB MOVEMENT
Chapter 65: ARMS
PAIN IN THE ELBOW
HANDS
31
FINGERS
NAILS
Chapter 66: LEGS
FEET
ATROPHY OF THE LEGS
PARALYSIS OF THE LEGS
GAIT
ARCHED LEGS
PAIN
KNEES
WEAKNESS OF THE LEGS
A FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LEGS
RESTLESS LEGS
TREMOR OF THE LEGS
CRAMPS IN THE CALVES
LOWER LEG ULCERS
TOE ULCERS
BURNING SENSATION IN THE SOLES
Chapter 67: LOWER BACK
LOWER BACKACHE
SCIATICA
FEELING OF COLD AND HEAVINESS OF THE LOWER BACK
WEAKNESS OF THE LOWER BACK AND KNEES
32
STIFFNESS OF THE LOWER BACK
COCCYX PAIN
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
SKIN SIGNS
SPINAL CURVATURE
Chapter 68: BODY
BODY ACHES
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
LOSS OF FEELING
ITCHING
OEDEMA
WEIGHT CHANGE
JAUNDICE
TWITCHING OF MUSCLES
OPISTHOTONOS
Chapter 69: DIGESTIVE SYSTEM AND TASTE
BELCHING
REGURGITATION
HICCUP
HUNGER AND EATING
SLEEPINESS AFTER EATING
NAUSEA, RETCHING AND VOMITING
33
TASTE
Chapter 70: THIRST AND DRINK
THIRST
DRY MOUTH
ABSENCE OF THIRST
INCREASED SALIVATION
Chapter 71: ABDOMEN
INTRODUCTION
PAIN
DISTENSION AND FULLNESS
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE ABDOMEN
BORBORYGMI
FLATULENCE
SKIN SIGNS
ABDOMINAL MASSES
OEDEMA OF THE ABDOMEN
ABDOMINAL SIZE
SAGGING LOWER ABDOMEN
UMBILICUS
Chapter 72: DEFECATION
DIARRHOEA OR LOOSE STOOLS
DIARRHOEA WITH VOMITING
34
CONSTIPATION
ALTERNATION OF CONSTIPATION AND LOOSE STOOLS
INCONTINENCE OF FAECES
BLOOD AND MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
BLOOD IN THE STOOLS
DIFFICULTY IN DEFECATION
STRAINING IN DEFECATION
Chapter 73: URINATION
DARK URINE
PALE AND ABUNDANT URINE
TURBID URINE
PAINFUL URINATION
SCANTY AND DIFFICULT URINATION
DIFFICULT URINATION
FREQUENT URINATION
DRIBBLING OF URINE
INCONTINENCE OF URINE
NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
URINATION AT NIGHT
BLOOD IN THE URINE
SPERM IN THE URINE
Chapter 74: ANUS
35
ITCHING OF THE ANUS
HAEMORRHOIDS
ANAL PROLAPSE
ANAL FISSURE
ANAL FISTULA
ANAL ULCERS
Chapter 75: MEN’S SEXUAL AND GENITAL SYMPTOMS
IMPOTENCE
LACK OF LIBIDO
EJACULATION
PRIAPISM
COLD GENITALS
SCROTUM
PENIS
SWELLING AND PAIN OF THE TESTICLES
PUBIC HAIR
Chapter 76: SWEATING
SPONTANEOUS SWEATING
NIGHT SWEATING
SWEATING FROM COLLAPSE
YELLOW SWEAT
LOCALIZED SWEATING
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
36
Chapter 77: SKIN SIGNS
GREASY SKIN
DRY SKIN
ERUPTIONS
INFECTIONS
GROWTHS AND MASSES
NECK ULCERS
Chapter 78: EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
PROPENSITY TO ANGER
PROPENSITY TO WORRY
SADNESS
FEAR/ANXIETY
TENDENCY TO BE EASILY STARTLED
EXCESS JOY
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
SEVERE TIMIDITY
INAPPROPRIATE LAUGHTER
Chapter 79: MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
DEPRESSION
DEPRESSION AND MANIC BEHAVIOUR
ANXIETY
IRRITABILITY
SCHIZOPHRENIA
37
Chapter 80: MENTAL DIFFICULTIES
POOR MEMORY
DIFFICULTY IN CONCENTRATION
LEARNING DIFFICULTY IN CHILDREN
HYPERACTIVITY
Chapter 81: SLEEP PROBLEMS
INSOMNIA
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
SOMNOLENCE
SLEEP TALKING
SLEEP WALKING
SNORING
Chapter 82: FEELING OF COLD, FEELING OF HEAT, FEVER
FEELING OF COLD, SHIVERING
FEVER
FIVE-PALM HEAT
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT
Chapter 83: VOICE, SPEECH AND SOUNDS
LOUD VOICE
WEAK VOICE
MUFFLED VOICE
HOARSE VOICE
38
NASAL VOICE
SNORING
SLURRED SPEECH
INCOHERENT, INCESSANT SPEECH
MUTTERING TO ONESELF
DELIRIOUS SPEECH
DIFFICULTY IN FINDING WORDS
STUTTERING
GROANING
CRYING OUT
SECTION 2: GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 84: MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
PERIODS
Chapter 85: PROBLEMS AT PERIOD TIME
PREMENSTRUAL TENSION
HEADACHE
BREAST DISTENSION
FEVER
39
BODY ACHES
OEDEMA
DIARRHOEA
CONSTIPATION
NOSEBLEED
MOUTH ULCERS
SKIN ERUPTIONS
DIZZINESS
VOMITING
INSOMNIA
EYE PAIN
Chapter 86: PROBLEMS DURING PREGNANCY
MORNING SICKNESS
VAGINAL BLEEDING
ABDOMINAL PAIN
OEDEMA
URINATION PROBLEMS
CONSTIPATION
ANXIETY
DIZZINESS
COUGH
LOSS OF VOICE
FEELING OF SUFFOCATION
40
CONVULSIONS (ECLAMPSIA)
PROBLEMS WITH THE FETUS
Chapter 87: PROBLEMS AFTER CHILDBIRTH
RETENTION OF PLACENTA
LOCHIA
PAIN
VAGINAL BLEEDING
URINARY DIFFICULTY
CONSTIPATION
SWEATING
DIZZINESS
OEDEMA
FEVER
BREAST MILK
POSTNATAL DEPRESSION/PSYCHOSIS
COLLAPSE
CONVULSIONS
Chapter 88: BREAST SIGNS
BREAST DISTENSION AND SWELLING
BREAST PAIN
BREAST LUMPS
NIPPLES
PEAU D’ ORANGE SKIN
41
SMALL BREASTS
Chapter 89: MISCELLANEOUS GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS
INFERTILITY
MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME
ABDOMINAL MASSES
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
INFLAMMATION AND SWELLING
PROLAPSE
LEUKOPLAKIA
DYSPAREUNIA
BLEEDING ON INTERCOURSE
LACK OF LIBIDO
PUBIC HAIR
SECTION 3: PAEDIATRIC SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
PAEDIATRIC SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 90: CHILDREN’S PROBLEMS
FEVER
VOMITING
DIARRHOEA
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
42
EAR PROBLEMS
HOT PALMS AND SOLES
CONSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESS
CONSTIPATION IN INFANCY
URINATION PROBLEMS
CRYING
DISTURBED SLEEP
ACCUMULATION DISORDER
WORMS
FIVE FLACCIDITIES
FIVE RETARDATIONS
INFLAMMATIONS
JAUNDICE
INFECTIONS
FLAPPING OF NOSTRILS
CONVULSIONS
FETUS TOXIN
FONTANELLES
WHITE SPOTS ON THE PALATE AND TONGUE
LONG PENIS
PART 6: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
INTRODUCTION
43
SECTION 1: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE INTERNAL ORGANS
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO THE
INTERNAL ORGANS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 91: HEART
HEART-QI DEFICIENCY
HEART-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
HEART-YANG COLLAPSE
HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
HEART-QI AND HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
HEART-QI AND HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY
DEFICIENCY OF BOTH HEART-YANG AND HEART-YIN
HEART-QI STAGNATION
HEART-FIRE BLAZING
PHLEGM PATTERNS
HEART-BLOOD STASIS
HEART VESSEL OBSTRUCTION
WATER OVERFLOWING TO THE HEART
TURBID DAMPNESS SURROUNDING THE HEART
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 92: SPLEEN
44
SPLEEN-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
SPLEEN-YANG DEFICIENCY
SPLEEN-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
SPLEEN-QI SINKING
SPLEEN NOT CONTROLLING BLOOD
SPLEEN-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
COLD-DAMPNESS IN THE SPLEEN
DAMP-HEAT IN THE SPLEEN
SPLEEN-HEAT
PHLEGM OBSTRUCTING THE MIDDLE BURNER
YIN FIRE FROM DEFICIENCY OF THE STOMACH AND SPLEEN
AND ORIGINAL QI
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 93: LIVER
LIVER-QI STAGNATION PATTERNS
REBELLIOUS LIVER-QI
LIVER-YANG RISING
LIVER-BLOOD STASIS
LIVER-FIRE BLAZING UPWARDS
DAMP-HEAT
LIVER-WIND
LIVER-BLOOD DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
STAGNATION OF COLD IN THE LIVER CHANNEL
LIVER-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
45
LIVER-QI DEFICIENCY
LIVER PHLEGM-FIRE
LIVER-YANG DEFICIENCY
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 94: LUNGS
LUNG-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
LUNG-YANG DEFICIENCY
LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
LUNG-QI AND LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY
LUNG-DRYNESS
INVASION OF LUNGS BY WIND
LUNG-HEAT
PHLEGM PATTERNS
LUNG-QI STAGNATION
LUNG-QI COLLAPSE
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 95: KIDNEYS
KIDNEY-QI DEFICIENCY
KIDNEY-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
KIDNEY-YANG AND KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
KIDNEY-QI NOT FIRM
KIDNEYS FAILING TO RECEIVE QI
46
KIDNEY-ESSENCE DEFICIENCY
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 96: SMALL INTESTINE
FULL-HEAT IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
SMALL INTESTINE QI PAIN
SMALL INTESTINE QI TIED
SMALL INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
INFESTATION OF WORMS IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
Chapter 97: STOMACH
STOMACH-QI DEFICIENCY
STOMACH DEFICIENT AND COLD (STOMACH-YANG DEFICIENCY)
STOMACH-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
DEFICIENCY OF STOMACH-YIN AND STOMACH-YANG
STOMACH-QI STAGNATION
BLOOD STASIS IN THE STOMACH
STOMACH-HEAT
STOMACH-FIRE
STOMACH PHLEGM-FIRE
STOMACH DAMP-HEAT
COLD INVADING THE STOMACH
STOMACH-QI REBELLING UPWARDS
RETENTION OF FOOD IN THE STOMACH
47
Chapter 98: GALL-BLADDER
DAMP-HEAT PATTERNS
DAMP-COLD IN THE GALL-BLADDER
GALL-BLADDER HEAT
GALL-BLADDER DEFICIENT
STAGNATION OF THE GALL-BLADDER WITH PHLEGM-HEAT
COMBINED PATTERNS
Chapter 99: LARGE INTESTINE
DAMP-HEAT IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
HEAT PATTERNS
COLD PATTERNS
LARGE INTESTINE DRYNESS
DAMPNESS IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND DAMP
COLLAPSE OF LARGE INTESTINE
Chapter 100: BLADDER
DAMP-HEAT IN THE BLADDER
DAMP-COLD IN THE BLADDER
BLADDER DEFICIENT AND COLD
SECTION 2: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
QI, BLOOD AND BODY FLUIDS
48
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO QI, BLOOD
AND BODY FLUIDS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 101: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
QI, BLOOD, YANG AND YIN
QI
BLOOD
YANG
YIN
COMBINED QI, BLOOD, YIN AND YANG
Chapter 102: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
BODY FLUIDS
DEFICIENCY OF BODY FLUIDS
OEDEMA
PHLEGM
SECTION 3: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC FACTORS, FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES AND
THREE BURNERS
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC FACTORS, FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES AND
THREE BURNERS
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 103: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC FACTORS
49
INTRODUCTION
WIND
COLD
SUMMER-HEAT
DAMPNESS
DRYNESS
FIRE
Chapter 104: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE FOUR LEVELS
INTRODUCTION
DEFENSIVE-QI LEVEL
QI LEVEL
NUTRITIVE-QI LEVEL
BLOOD LEVEL
THE FOUR LEVELS IN A NUTSHELL
LATENT HEAT
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES AND
THREE BURNERS
Chapter 105: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE SIX STAGES
GREATER-YANG STAGE
BRIGHT-YANG STAGE
LESSER-YANG STAGE
GREATER-YIN STAGE
50
LESSER-YIN STAGE
TERMINAL-YIN STAGE
Chapter 106: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE THREE BURNERS
UPPER BURNER
MIDDLE BURNER
LOWER BURNER
Chapter 107: RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
INTRODUCTION
FORMATION OF RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC
FACTOR
PHLEGM
DAMPNESS
HEAT
LESSER-YANG PATTERN
SECTION 4: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES, 12 CHANNELS, EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY VESSELS AND FIVE ELEMENTS
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO THE EIGHT
PRINCIPLES, 12 CHANNELS, EIGHT EXTRAORDINARY
VESSELS AND FIVE ELEMENTS
INTRODUCTION
51
Chapter 108: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES
INTRODUCTION
INTERIOR–EXTERIOR
HOT–COLD
FULL–EMPTY
YIN–YANG
Chapter 109: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE 12 CHANNELS
LUNGS
LARGE INTESTINE
STOMACH
SPLEEN
HEART
SMALL INTESTINE
BLADDER
KIDNEYS
PERICARDIUM
TRIPLE BURNER
GALL-BLADDER
LIVER
Chapter 110: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT EXTRAORDINARY VESSELS
INTRODUCTION
52
GOVERNING VESSEL (DU MAI)
DIRECTING VESSEL (REN MAI)
PENETRATING VESSEL (CHONG MAI)
COMBINED DIRECTING AND PENETRATING VESSEL PATTERNS
GIRDLE VESSEL (DAI MAI)
YIN HEEL VESSEL (YIN QIAO MAI)
YANG HEEL VESSEL (YANG QIAO MAI)
YIN LINKING VESSEL (YIN WEI MAI)
YANG LINKING VESSEL (YANG WEI MAI)
Chapter 111: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE FIVE ELEMENTS
INTRODUCTION
GENERATING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
OVERACTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
INSULTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: CASE HISTORIES
Appendix 2: PRESCRIPTIONS
Appendix 3: HISTORY OF DIAGNOSIS IN CHINESE MEDICINE
Glossary of Chinese terms
53
Bibliography
Chinese chronology
INDEX
Notes
COLOUR PLATES
54
Copyright page
Churchill Livingstone
An imprint of Elsevier Science Limited
© 2004 Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
The right of Giovanni Maciocia to be identified as author of this
book has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without either the prior permission of the publishers or a licence
permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the
Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London
W1T 4LP. Permission may be sought directly from Elsevier’s
Health Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia, USA: phone
(+1) 215 238 7869, fax (+1) 215 238 2239, e-mail:
healthpermission@elsevier.com
 
. You may also complete your
request on-line via the Elsevier Science homepage
(
http://www.elsevier.com
 
), by selecting ‘Customer Support’ and
then ‘Obtaining Permissions’.
First published 2004
ISBN 0 443 06448 2
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of
Congress
55
 
Notice
Medical knowledge is constantly changing. Standard
safety precautions must be followed, but as new
research and clinical experience broaden our
knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy may
become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised
to check the most current product information provided
by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to
verify the recommended dose, the method and duration
of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on experience
and knowledge of the patient, to determine dosages and
the best treatment for each individual patient. Neither
the Publisher nor the author assumes any liability for
any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising
from this publication.
The Publisher
For Churchill Livingstone:
Publishing Manager: Inta Ozols
Associate Editor: Karen Morley
Project Manager: Samantha Ross
Designer: Andy Chapman
Illustration Manager: Bruce Hogarth
Printed in China
56
To the memory of my
parents
For 16 years Giovanni Maciocia has been the one author in the field
of oriental medicine whose books have become the essential study
and practice texts for an entire generation in the West. With this
long-awaited comprehensive book on diagnosis and differentiation
of symptoms, he adds to this impressive body of work and no
student nor practitioner will want to be without it.
Peter Deadman, Editor, Journal of Chinese Medicine, Author of ‘A
Manual of Acupuncture’
Maciocia has yet again made another very significant
contribution to our field. His ‘Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine’ is
incredibly comprehensive, clearly written with supporting
examples from his vast clinical experience, and an important and
very useful text for both students and seasoned practitioners.
Peter Valaskatgis, Chair of the Chinese Acupuncture Studies Dept.
New England School of Acupuncture
Maciocia draws on his many years of meticulous clinical
observation and long and thorough study of the classics to provide
a series of profound insights into human pathology and
differential diagnosis that are invaluable to the modern
practitioner of Chinese medicine.
Jeremy Ross Dr. Ac, BSc, MNIMH
Articulated and precise, the text by Giovanni Maciocia maps out
for the inexperienced reader a safe path through clinical symptoms
and signs; for those who are experts in the art, it is a most useful
57
manual for consultation. This book is indispensable both for
students and for practitioners of all levels.
Massimo Muccioli, Professor of Acupuncture and Diet Therapy,
Director of Faculty of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Scuola Matteo Ricci,
Bologna, Italy
Giovanni Maciocia has consistently provided the West with
precise knowledge and profound clarity concerning Eastern
medicine. This new work continues his unique scholar–
practitioner tradition of teaching and writing that simultaneously
supplies immediately practical information with direct clinical
application with theoretical insight and wisdom that makes one
consider and ponder and see the Eastern tradition from new
perspectives. This is an invaluable addition to what can only be
described as the ongoing ‘Maciocia transmission’.
Ted Kaptchuk, OMD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School
Maciocia’s new book on diagnosis brilliantly fills a gap in the
existing literature. It appears encyclopedic yet is surprisingly
useful in daily practice. While it is solidly based on Chinese
medicine, this book guides the reader in applying the principles of
traditional diagnosis to present-day Western patients. Physician
acupuncturists will especially appreciate the book’s easy access to
discover the significance of symptoms and signs they encounter in
their practices. It’s a remarkably good book.
Joseph M. Helms, M.D., President, Helms Medical Institute,
Founding President, American Academy of Medical Acupuncture
Maciocia’s ‘Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine’ is an indispensable
tool for the interpretation of symptoms and signs. It is the first
text that helps the practitioner to understand the significance of
symptoms and signs making diagnosis and treatment strategies
easier and more logical.
Dr Carlo Maria Giovanardi, President Italian Federation of
Acupuncture Societies, Director Acupuncture College of Matteo Ricci
Foundation, Bologna, Italy
58
Foreword
It gives me great pleasure to write a foreword to this book, the
latest in the series on the fundamentals of Chinese medicine. It
follows the same high standard that we have come to expect. Here
we see the principles of diagnosis presented clearly in relation to
the differentiation of syndromes, one of the great theories of
Chinese medicine.
Mr Maciocia was the first to attempt any book in the English
language on diagnosis, with his excellent book on tongue
diagnosis. That still remains the best textbook on the subject. Now
he has succeeded in writing a more complete book on the whole
subject. Presented for the first time are all the little details
observable in clinic, which, when put together, form a complete
whole. Some of this information comes from his tireless
translation of Chinese texts, which are inaccessible to most
Western practitioners; and part comes from his clinical experience
with patients in the West. This makes the book all the more
valuable, as the lifestyle in the West is so different from the
Chinese lifestyle, that many of the clinical signs point in a
different direction.
The practice of medicine is about relieving suffering. Human
nature is complex and so the diseases and ailments which cause
this suffering are also complex. When trying to unravel
complexities of this nature, one needs a frame of reference on
which to base understanding. The basis for understanding them is
a philosophy which helps to understand life, and how people come
to suffer in the first place. One of the glories of Chinese medicine
is its foundation in a rich and holistic philosophy which
59
incorporates all of human experience. Above all, it is a philosophy
that recognizes the vast complexity of human nature. At its heart is
the Yin–Yang theory, together with the theory of Five
Transformations. But this is only the foundation. There are a
multitude of other theories built on this – the theory of
penetration by Cold, the theory of Warm Diseases, the theory of
tonifying the Earth, to name but a few. At times some of these
theories seem mutually incompatible.
In Chinese science and medicine, it is rare for a new theory to
lead to the total abandonment of an old one. There is the feeling
that if the ancestors said something, and took the trouble to write
it down, then it must contain truths worthy of study. Out of respect
for the ancestors, any new theory is grafted onto the old one. It is
understood that there is no theory that is sufficiently complete to
explain all of human behaviour. The human mind is too small, and
the complexity of life is too great. When there are two theories that
do not seem to fit with each other, this is not seen as a problem.
There will be one theory that explains one situation, while there is
another that explains a different one. This is a problem for the
beginner in Chinese medicine, particularly one like myself who
was brought up in the Western scientific tradition. At times, when
learning Chinese medicine, it seemed as though one had to heed
the advice of the Red Queen, to ‘believe three impossible things
before breakfast.’ When one learns more, it slowly becomes clear
that all theories have their application, and it is the context that is
all-important.
Apparent inconsistencies of this nature are rare in Western
science. The reason is that there is an unstated assumption that
modern theories are good, and an improvement on old theories.
Therefore the old theories are abandoned, and with it any danger
of inconsistency. In medicine, the modern theories, based on
microscopic observations of bacteria, viruses and genes, have
superseded the old humoral theories, and relegated them to
history. Unfortunately this process means that a lot that is valuable
is thrown out at the same time. Although the theories of Hot and
Cold permeate all other medical systems, and give a valuable
indication of what medicine to prescribe, based on what the
patient actually experiences, these phenomenological theories
60
have been totally abandoned in favour of objective material tests.
Subjective feelings, like the patient’s will to live, have little place in
modern Western medicine.
By contrast, in Chinese medicine, the role of the mind and
consciousness is considered of great importance. In the very first
term, the student of TCM learns that ‘the Heart houses the Shen’.
From the outset it is stated that there is a consciousness which is
related to the body. It is implicit that the consciousness influences
the body, and vice versa. Right from the very start there is this
recognition that human beings are more than mere walking lumps
of flesh. All of life – movement, feelings, behaviour and physical
body – are governed by the laws of Yin and Yang. They are in
constant motion, constantly varying.
It is quite natural that one should have feelings of anger,
compassion and anguish. Illness occurs when these get out of
balance. Likewise, hot and cold, dry and damp are constantly
varying. Thus the art of diagnosis in TCM is much more subtle.
Not only does it involve assessing the state of the physical body,
but it also involves assessing the emotional state, and the whole
state of a person’s life.
Diagnosis is based on the idea that there must be a fundamental
imbalance in Yin and Yang for illness to occur, and that this
imbalance will manifest in all areas of human experience. For
example, the patient will show an imbalance in colour, movement,
texture of skin, food preferences, music, clothes, sports, or styles of
painting. On the body, the channels, the Elements, the Blood, and
the whole way that Qi flows will be influenced by the imbalance.
This difference in the philosophical basis is evident when it
comes to diagnosis. The philosophical basis for Western medicine
is strongly biased towards the material basis of life, and diagnosis
leans heavily in this direction. A diagnosis now depends more on
tests than on the observation skills of the physician. The bacteria
which are causing disease, or the part of the body that is
dysfunctional, are considered to be the cause of the disease. For
most physicians the emotional life of the patient is of negligible
importance. Even less important would be their favourite colours.
In Chinese medicine, the material components of the body are
important, but so also is the emotional state of patients. Just as
61
important is the spirit of patients and their Qi. The will to live is
every bit as important as the microscopic components of the
illness. When treating a stomach ulcer due to Liver invading the
Stomach, the emotions have to be taken into account. The degree
of inflexibility of a patient’s anger is every bit as important as the
size of the ulcer in assessing treatment and outcome.
‘Western medicine is difficult to learn, but easy to practise.
Chinese medicine is easy to learn, but difficult to practise.’ These
are the words of our late teacher, Dr J. F. Shen. At first sight,
Chinese medicine seems very easy. There is not all that much to
learn (by comparison with orthodox medicine). Although the
present book is large, it contains almost all that can be said about
diagnosis. The equivalent book in orthodox medicine might fill a
whole shelf. However, one should not judge the richness of the
medicine by a word count, for each word is part of a ‘pith
instruction’, a sentence that contains a wealth of meaning, and
needs to be interpreted by one who is experienced in the art. The
instructions on diagnosis are short sentences to point the way,
rather than give a detailed instruction.
Diagnosis, which means knowing, or understanding, a patient, is
the heart of medicine. Once knowledge about the patient and his
illness has been gathered and understood, then the nature of the
illness and its likely course are known. The principles of treatment
become clear and the progress of the illness predictable. But
without a clear understanding of the patient and the condition
being treated, the practitioner is fumbling in the dark. Treatment
is haphazard and cure uncertain. Chinese medicine, although
difficult to practise, comes to a more certain and more complete
diagnosis, one which incorporates all aspects of a patient’s life, and
so comes to a more reliable treatment than Western medicine.
We are now living in a time of rapid change. The world of the
21st century is very different from the world that the author was
born into. But human nature remains the same. People still have
likes and dislikes, loves and hates, pleasures and pain. They still
have to experience the constant fluctuations of Yin and Yang. They
still have to witness their greatest pleasure turning into the source
of their greatest pain. And all of this is built into the fabric of
Chinese medicine. So, although society and lifestyle appears to
62
change, Chinese medicine is still as relevant today as it has ever
been. It still provides the basic framework for understanding
people and their illness. Thus the art of diagnosis in Chinese
medicine becomes richer and richer the more it is practised. The
pith instructions in this book seem to become richer and more
meaningful the longer they are used and the wider their field of
application.
It is said in the Nei Jing that the superior doctor can predict
disease before it occurs, the average doctor can diagnose disease
when it is present, while the inferior doctor cannot even diagnose
accurately when it has occurred. With this book, it will now be
possible for more TCM practitioners to become superior.
2004
Julian Scott
63
Preface
This book on diagnosis in Chinese medicine complements my
previous books: on the basic theory of Chinese medicine
‘Foundations of Chinese Medicine’, the application of this theory
to the treatment of diseases ‘Practice of Chinese Medicine’, tongue
diagnosis ‘Tongue Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine’ and
gynaecology ‘Obstetrics and Gynaecology in Chinese Medicine’.
The longer I practise, the more I appreciate the importance of
diagnosis to Chinese medicine in particular and to medicine in
general. Indeed, one could say that the value of Chinese medicine
lies not in its theories of Yin–Yang, Five Elements, Eight Principles,
etc., but in diagnosis itself. Chinese medicine diagnosis is so
valuable because it starts firmly from the careful 
examination
 
of the
patient: this forms the basis of diagnosis in any type of medicine
from any cultural background, including modern Western
medicine.
Although it is not often appreciated, modern Western medicine
used to be based on the careful examination of the patient, before
technology and modern diagnostic aids took precedence over it.
Technological tests have replaced a proper examination of the
patient; this is the weakest link of Western medicine and it is also
the reason why Chinese medicine, with its careful examination of
the patient, appeals to many thousands of medical doctors all over
the world.
An example from my practice is particularly apt to illustrate this
point. A patient came to me for a one-off consultation (she lived in
the USA) about persistent hip and back pain. She was 78 and for 4
years had been suffering from severe pain in the lower back
64
irradiating towards the right hip. She went to see one of the top
neurosurgeons in the USA who ordered a scan; purely on the basis
of this and without a proper examination, he diagnosed a problem
with the intervertebral spaces in the lumbar spine. He did not
recommend an operation and the patient went on to suffer for
another 2 years. She had been very active in her mid-seventies,
playing tennis three times a week, but she could now hardly walk.
When I examined her, the first thing I noticed was that she
walked with a limp, her body oscillating sideways. I have no
osteopathic skills but I have observed over the years that people
with a chronic back problem tend to walk leaning slightly forward;
her walk was quite different and, in my experience, was related to a
hip problem rather than a back problem. I took a detailed history
and then asked her to lie down on the couch. I did the straight-leg
lifting test (i.e. lifting her right leg with a straight knee); this
elicited no pain in the back. I then abducted her right leg and this
produced an intense pain in the hip. Everything pointed to a hip
rather than a lower back problem. I was still very hesitant to
question the diagnosis of an eminent neurosurgeon. I therefore
rang a colleague in Italy who is an extremely skilled and
knowledgeable osteopath and, while on the phone, he asked me to
make the patient perform three other movements for diagnostic
purposes. To my astonishment, he confirmed that the patient
definitely suffered from a hip rather than a lower back pathology. I
asked her to have an X-ray of the hip (which had not been ordered
by her neurosurgeon) as soon as she went back to the USA. This
she did and the X-ray showed that her right hip was completely
and totally invaded by very severe osteoarthritis. She had a hip
replacement, her pain has completely disappeared and she is back
on the tennis court. She is now 80.
I report this case history as a glaring illustration of how the
proper examination of the patient including a careful taking of the
case history has been forgotten in Western medicine in favour of
technological tests. Of course such tests are important, but they
must follow and be guided by a proper examination of the patient.
Another example of the power of diagnosis in Chinese medicine
springs to mind with a patient I saw a few months ago. She was a
29-year-old woman who had a severe pain in the back, lethargy and
65
sickness, which had been diagnosed by her general practitioner
(GP) as a kidney infection. She had been taking antibiotics for a
week, which had made no apparent difference to the symptoms.
After questioning the patient, it transpired that the pain, which
was indeed in the area of the left kidney, was related to movement
and was worse on breathing in. She had no fever (in fact she felt
quite cold) and no urinary symptoms. Her pulse and tongue were
unremarkable, other than the fact that the Liver and Gall-Bladder
positions were Wiry and slightly Tight. The Kidney and Bladder
pulse felt quite healthy and there was no sticky yellow coating on
most of the tongue.
On the basis of the above, I felt that the GP’s diagnosis of a
kidney infection was unlikely to be correct and that the pain was
more likely to come from a problem with the ribs (which is why
the Liver and Gall-Bladder position on the pulse was affected): the
aggravation of the pain on breathing strongly pointed to a rib
problem as backache from a urinary infection would not be
affected by breathing. I treated her accordingly and the pain
immediately improved. An osteopath later confirmed that, in fact,
the twelfth rib was displaced and that it was this that had been
causing the pain.
This case history in another illustration of the importance of a
proper 
examination
 
of the patient (which the above-mentioned GP
had omitted to do): this is the real strength of Chinese diagnosis
and Chinese medicine in general. The strength of Chinese
medicine diagnosis is precisely in the incredibly detailed
examination of the patient approached from the four viewpoints of
observation, interrogation, palpation and hearing/smelling.
Chinese medicine diagnosis is also strong in its holistic view of
the body and mind. Probably no other form of diagnosis can make
such a comprehensive, holistic and detailed assessment of a
patient in a relatively short time, pulling all the different strands
of diagnosis together. For example, as soon as a patient comes in,
the practitioner of Chinese medicine exerts all his or her senses to
their sharpest, observing the way the patient walks, the level of
vitality, the strength of voice, the lustre of the eyes and
complexion, the shape of the face, the complexion colour, the smell
of the body, the hair, the tongue and, finally, the pulse.
66
Another motivation for writing a book on diagnosis is that I feel
this is an area that has been neglected in modern China. In their
eagerness to ‘modernize’ Chinese medicine and make it more
acceptable to the biomedical establishment in China and in the
West, modern Chinese doctors and teachers have tended to
overlook the more subtle aspects of Chinese diagnosis, especially
tongue and pulse diagnosis. Too often, in Chinese clinics, the
clinical teacher will describe a pulse quality in a perfunctory way to
make
 
it agree with the clinical manifestations: if a patient has all
the symptoms of Liver-Qi stagnation, the pulse 
is
 
Wiry. This
ignores the possibility that the pulse might be Choppy instead
(indicating that the stagnation of Liver-Qi is secondary to a Liver-
Blood deficiency). It is my wish that the more subtle aspects of
Chinese diagnosis be preserved.
The book is divided into the traditional four major parts of
Chinese diagnosis, that is, diagnosis by observation (‘
to look
 
’),
interrogation (‘
to ask
 
’), palpation (‘
to touch
 
’) and auscultation (‘
to
hear and to smell
 
’). In addition to these four major parts, 
Part 5
covers symptoms and signs: whereas 
Part 1
 
Observation deals with
signs and 
Part 2
 
Interrogation deals with symptoms, 
Part 5
Symptoms and Signs lists hundreds of different clinical
manifestations, irrespective of which category they fall into, and
arranges them according to the part of the body they affect.
The separation between observation and interrogation is made
purely for didactic purposes and does not correspond to clinical
reality where what is seen on observation and what is elicited on
interrogation occurs simultaneously and may be integrated
automatically. For example, the separation between dry skin (a sign
in observation) and itchy skin (a symptom in interrogation) is
artificial and unrealistic. Another good example is that of oedema
of the ankles: the observation of this sign is immediately
integrated with palpation of the area and interrogation of the
patient.
Moreover, the combination of both symptoms and signs for each
area corresponds also to how we normally proceed with the
patient. For example, when a patient comes in and the clinical
manifestations are mainly concentrated in one area of the body, we
would naturally investigate that area first by asking about
67
symptoms and observing any outward sign without distinction
between interrogation and observation. Supposing a patient
complains about blurred vision, we would immediately and
automatically observe the eyes to see whether they are dry or
bloodshot.
Part 6
 
lists the patterns of Chinese medicine from various points
of view – that is, the Internal Organs, the pathogenic factors, Qi,
Blood and Body Fluids, the Eight Principles, 12 channels, Four
Levels, Six Stages, Three Burners and Five Elements. It should be
noted that the patterns listed in 
Part 5
 
on Symptoms and Signs
have been adapted to each particular symptom and will not
necessarily correspond to the patterns in 
Part 6
 
. For example, the
pattern of Liver-Blood deficiency under a particular eye symptom
will contain symptoms and signs slightly different from those
given in the general pattern of Liver-Blood deficiency in 
Part 6
 
.
Part 6
 
lists treatment with acupuncture and herbal medicine
whenever appropriate.
At the beginning of the book there is an index of all symptoms
and signs contained in 
Part 5
 
with cross-references to 
Part 1
(Observation), 
Part 2
 
(Interrogation), 
Part 3
 
(Palpation) and 
Part 4
(Hearing and Smelling).
Appendix 1
 
contains case histories with a particular diagnostic
significance, which are used to illustrate important principles of
Chinese medicine theory. 
Appendix 2
 
lists all the herbal formulae
mentioned in 
Part 6
 
on Patterns. 
Appendix 3
 
is a brief history of
Chinese diagnosis.
Amersham, 2004
Giovanni Maciocia
68
Acknowledgements
Many teachers have inspired my interest in diagnosis. I am
indebted to the late Dr J. H. F. Shen for imparting to me some of
his knowledge and skill in pulse diagnosis which I have been
trying to convey in this book.
Dr J. D. Van Buren was the first teacher who taught me the art of
diagnosis by observation and I am grateful to him for inspiring me
at the very beginning of my professional career.
I express my gratitude to all the teachers and staff of the
Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine: studying and
spending clinical periods there have been crucial to my
professional development.
Rebecca Avern contributed greatly to the book with her
suggestions and comments; she also saw the book through from
the very beginning in all its stages and assisted me with editing:
for this I am deeply grateful.
I am indebted to Dr Andreas Hoell for reading the manuscript
and giving me many helpful suggestions and comments and to
Isobel Cosgrove and Tim Davis for reading the manuscript and
making many helpful suggestions derived from their clinical
experience. Alan Papier read the manuscript and made many
useful suggestions, for which I am grateful.
I wish to express my appreciation to Dr Jin Hui De and Ms Fu
Zhi Wen for their invaluable help in the translation of Chinese
texts.
I would also like to thank the staff at Churchill Livingstone,
especially Inta Ozols, Dinah Thom, Samantha Ross and Karen
Morley, for their professionalism, helpfulness and kindness.
69
Note on the
translation of
Chinese terms
The terminology used in this book generally follows that used in
‘Foundations of Chinese Medicine’, ‘Practice of Chinese Medicine’
and ‘Obstetrics and Gynaecology in Chinese Medicine’. As in
those books, I have opted for translating all Chinese medical terms
with the exception of Yin, Yang, Qi and 
cun
 
(unit of measurement).
I have also continued using initial capitals for the terms which
are specific to Chinese medicine. For example, ‘Blood’ indicates
one of the vital substances of Chinese medicine, whereas ‘blood’
denotes the liquid flowing in the blood vessels, for example ‘In
Blood deficiency the menstrual blood may be pale’. I use initial
capitals also for all pulse qualities and for pathological colours and
shapes of the tongue body. This system may not be ideal but it has
served readers of my previous books well. As most teachers
(including myself) use Chinese terms when lecturing (e.g. Yuan Qi
rather than Original Qi), I have given each term in pinyin and
Chinese characters whenever it is introduced for the first time.
I made the choice of translating all Chinese terms (with the
exceptions indicated above) mostly for reasons of style: I believe
that a well-written English text reads better than one peppered
with Chinese terms in pinyin. Leaving Chinese terms in pinyin is
probably the easiest option but this is not ideal because a single
70
pinyin word can often have more than one meaning; for example,
jing
 
can mean ‘channels’, ‘periods’, ‘Essence’ or ‘shock’, while 
shen
can mean ‘Kidneys’ or ‘Mind/Spirit’.
I am conscious of the fact that there is no such thing as a ‘right’
translation of a Chinese medicine term and my terminology is not
proposed in this spirit; in fact, Chinese medicine terms are
essentially impossible to translate. The greatest difficulty in
translating Chinese terms is probably that a term has many facets
and different meanings in different contexts; thus it would be
impossible for one translation to be ‘right’ in every situation. For
example, the term 
jue
 
(
 
) has many different meanings; a
translation can illustrate only one aspect of a multifaceted term. In
fact, 
jue
 
can mean a state of collapse with unconsciousness,
coldness of hands and feet, or a critical situation of retention of
urine. In other contexts it has other meanings: for example, 
jue qi
 
(
 
) is a condition of chaotic Qi, 
jue xin tong
 
(
 
) a condition of
violent chest pain with cold hands, and 
jue yin zheng
 
(
 
) the
Terminal-Yin pattern within the Six-Stage identification of patterns
characterized by Heat above and Cold below.
Although a diversity of translation of Chinese terms may
present its problems, these are easily overcome if an author
explains the translation in a glossary. Moreover, the problem arises
only in the written form as, in my experience, most lecturers in
colleges throughout the Western world normally prefer using
pinyin terms rather than their counterparts in English (or any
other Western languages). Thus, a lecturer will refer to Kidney-
jing
rather than ‘Essence’. A diversity of translation of Chinese terms
may even have a positive aspect as each author may highlight a
particular facet of a Chinese term so that diversity actually
enriches our understanding of Chinese medicine. If someone
translates 
zong qi
 
(
 
) as ‘Initial Qi’, for example, we learn
something about that author’s view and understanding of 
zong qi
 
;
the translation cannot be branded as 
wrong
 
(I translate this term as
‘Gathering Qi’). Another example: if someone translates 
yang qiao
mai
 
as ‘Yang Motility Vessel’, the translation captures one aspect of
this vessel’s nature; again, this could not be defined as wrong (I
translate the name of this vessel as ‘Yang Heel Vessel’). Trying to
impose a standard, 
right
 
translation of Chinese medicine terms
71
may lead to suppression of healthy debate. I therefore hope that
readers will continue to benefit from the diversity of translation of
Chinese medical terms and draw inspiration from the rich heritage
of Chinese medicine that it represents.
A glossary with Chinese characters, pinyin terms and English
translation appears on 
page 1061
 
.
72
How to use this book
The book is articulated into six parts and three appendices as
follows:
Part 1
 
Observation
Part 2
 
Interrogation
Part 3
 
Palpation
Part 4
 
Hearing and Smelling
Part 5
 
Symptoms and Signs
Part 6
 
Patterns
Appendix 1
 
Case histories
Appendix 2
 
Prescriptions
Appendix 3
 
History of Chinese diagnosis
Part 1
 
on observation discusses the diagnostic significance of
signs
 
by body area (e.g. head, face, eyes, ears, limbs, etc.). 
Part 2
 
on
interrogation describes the techniques used in asking questions
about various parts of the body; this process of asking questions
should elicit an account of 
symptoms
 
from the patient. 
Part 3
 
on
palpation includes pulse diagnosis and diagnosis from palpation
of the abdomen and channels. 
Part 4
 
describes the diagnostic
significance of sounds and smells. Thus, 
signs
 
are described in 
Part
1
 
on observation and 
symptoms
 
in 
Part 2
 
on interrogation.
Part 5
 
on symptoms and signs lists without discussion many
symptoms and signs with their related patterns. I would like to
stress that this part discusses the differentiation of patterns of
symptoms
 
and 
signs
 
, and 
not
 
diseases. For example, the reader will
find the differentiation of patterns for the symptoms of dizziness
and nausea, but not that for Meniere’s disease (which manifests
with dizziness and nausea). This is because it is the role of a book
73
on diagnosis to discuss symptoms and signs, and that of a book on
internal medicine to discuss diseases. This Part is linked to 
Parts 1
and 
2
 
in so far as it lists clinical manifestations irrespective of
whether they are symptoms or signs (
Fig. F.1
 
).
FIG. F.1
 
Link between observation, interrogation and symptoms
and sign
Please note that all the symptoms and signs described in 
Parts 1
and 
2
 
are covered in 
Part 5
 
on Symptoms and Signs, but not vice
versa; that is, this Part may contain some less common symptoms
and signs that are not in 
Parts 1
 
and 
2
 
.
All Parts of the book contain highlighted cross-references which
link one Part to another. For example, under the heading of ‘Red
eyes’ in 
Chapter 6
 
(Observation) there is a cross-reference linking
this sign to 
Chapter 61
 
(Symptoms and Signs); vice versa, in
Chapter 61
 
(Symptoms and Signs) under the sign of ‘red eyes’
there is a cross-reference linking this sign to 
Chapter 6
(Observation). This should facilitate navigation between the
different parts of the book for each particular symptom or sign
(
Fig. F.2
 
).
FIG. F.2
 
Link between Parts for each symptom or sign
There are three main ways to use this book, as follows:
1. 
 
The reader can read a particular chapter to gain an
74
understanding of the diagnostic significance of 
a specific part of
the body. For example, 
Chapter 3
 
contains a detailed discussion of
the diagnostic significance of the complexion colour, which is an
extremely important aspect of diagnosis. Likewise 
Chapter 49
 
in
Part 3
 
contains a detailed discussion of the general principles of
pulse diagnosis.
2. 
 
A second way to use the book is to ‘dip’ into it. If the reader is
faced with a patient with symptoms and signs that clearly revolve
around a particular area of the body, he or she may dip into the
sections dealing with that particular part of the body. For example,
if a patient presents with blurred vision, dry eyes and eye ache,
these symptoms and signs can be looked up in 
Chapter 6
 
in
Observation and 
Chapter 42
 
in Interrogation. 
Figure F.3
 
illustrates
the main face areas with the relevant chapter numbers from 
Part 1
on observation, 
Part 2
 
on interrogation and 
Part 5
 
on symptoms
and signs; 
Figure F.4
 
does the same for body areas.
FIG. F.3
 
Map of face areas
75
FIG. F.4
 
Map of body areas
3. 
 
A third way to use the book is for the reader to look up a
particular symptom or sign encountered in the clinic, especially if
this is an uncommon one such as sweating on one side of the body.
The symptom or sign should be read about in all parts of the book
in which it appears (e.g. 
Parts 2
 
and 
5
 
, or 
Parts 1
 
, 
3
 
and 
5
 
). Each
part may give slightly different information, or at least information
from a different perspective, about that symptom or sign.
76
HOW TO MOVE BETWEEN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE BOOK
To facilitate the link between the different parts of the book
(Observation, Interrogation, Palpation and Hearing/Smelling),
there is a symptoms index on page xlix. This lists each symptom
that is in 
Part 5
 
Symptoms and Signs and links it to 
Parts 1
 
to 
4
 
on
observation, interrogation, palpation and hearing and smelling.
For example, on looking up ‘dry nostrils’ (in 
Chapter 58
 
of
Symptoms and Signs), the reader will find that this symptom is
also discussed in 
Chapter 7
 
of Observation and 35 of Interrogation.
In addition, there is a cross-reference under ‘dry nostrils’ in
Symptoms and Signs which will also direct the reader to these
other chapters.
77
Index of symptoms
and signs
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
LIST OF
ABBREVIATIONS
CFIDS
chronic fatigue immune deficiency syndrome
CT
computerized tomography
HPV
human papilloma virus
lg
immunoglobulin
LGL
Lown-Ganong-Levine (syndrome)
MAOI
monoamine oxidase inhibitor
ME
myalgic encephalitis
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
PET
positron emission tomography
SSRI
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
TB
tuberculosis
WPW
Wolff-Parkinson-White (syndrome)
119
PART 1
DIAGNOSIS BY
OBSERVATION
120
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
OBSERVATION
Part contents
SECTION 1
 
OBSERVATION OF THE BODY, MIND AND
COMPLEXION
1. 
 
Observation of the body shape, physique and
demeanour
2. 
 
Observation of the Mind, Spirit and emotions
3. 
 
Observation of the complexion colour
4. 
 
Observation of body movements
SECTION 2
 
OBSERVATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
5. 
 
Observation of head, face and hair
6. 
 
Observation of the eyes
7. 
 
Observation of the nose
8. 
 
Observation of lips, mouth, palate, teeth, gums
and philtrum
9. 
 
Observation of the ears
10. 
 
Observation of the throat and neck
11. 
 
Observation of the back
12. 
 
Observation of women’s breasts
13. 
 
Observation of the heartbeat
121
14. 
 
Observation of the hands
15. 
 
Observation of the nails
16. 
 
Observation of the chest and abdomen
17. 
 
Observation of the genitalia
18. 
 
Observation of the four limbs
19. 
 
Observation of the legs
20. 
 
Observation of excretions
21. 
 
Observation of the skin
22. 
 
Observation in children
SECTION 3
 
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
23. 
 
Tongue diagnosis
24. 
 
Tongue-body colour
25. 
 
Tongue-body shape
26. 
 
Tongue coating
27. 
 
Tongue images and patterns
INTRODUCTION
Diagnosis by observation is one of the most important aspects of
Chinese diagnosis: in ancient times, it was considered the highest
diagnostic art and the mark of a superior doctor who could
diagnose simply by looking at a patient without any need to ask
questions or to palpate. Observation of the patient is also the first
diagnostic technique used as a patient comes in and a great deal of
information can be obtained simply by observation, for example
the patient’s constitution, body type, Five-Element type and
deviations from it, constitutional state of Yin and Yang, state of the
Mind and Spirit, etc.
Diagnosis by observation in Chinese medicine is based on the
principle that the Internal Organs and their disharmonies
manifest themselves externally with what the ancient Chinese
called ‘images’ (
xiang
 
). In disease, every aspect of the complex of
clinical manifestations is an ‘image’ of an internal disharmony, for
example a pulse image, a complexion image, a pattern image, a
122
tongue image, etc. 
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ discusses
the concept of ‘images’: ‘
 
The images of the five Yin organs can be
deduced and categorized; the five Yin organs correspond to the five
sounds which can be detected; the five colours can be observed. The
combination of the pulse [image] with the colours can give us the
whole picture.
 
’
 
1
 
The concept of correspondence between the
Internal Organs and their external image manifestations can be
found throughout the ‘Simple Questions’ and the ‘Spiritual Axis’.
For example, 
Chapter 37
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: ‘
 
The five
colours manifest on the face and through them we can observe the
Qi of the five Yin organs.
 
’
 
2
 
Chapter 71
 
of the same book says: ‘
By
observing the five colours, we can know the state of the 5 Yin
organs; by feeling the pulse and observing the colours, we can
diagnose conditions of Heat or Cold and Painful Obstruction
Syndrome.’
 
3
 
!
Remember
 
: in observation, avoid the two pitfalls:
either missing important details though seeing the
picture as a whole, or missing the whole picture while
paying excessive attention to details.
When observing a patient, it is important to look at the whole
picture, integrating the various aspects of observation, but also to
pay attention to details. Therefore, there are two pitfalls we should
avoid: either considering the whole picture but missing some
important details in it, or paying excessive attention to small
details but missing the whole picture.
Before discussing the various aspects of diagnosis by
observation, it is useful to review the various correspondences
between the Internal Organs and parts of the body, forming a
‘map’ of the body. These relationships are six:
 
• 
 
relationship between the five senses, the nine orifices
and the Internal Organs
• 
 
relationship between areas of the face and the
Internal Organs
• 
 
relationship between the five tissues and the Internal
Organs
123
• 
 
relationship between the five sites of Qi
transportation and the Yin organs
• 
 
manifestations of the five Yin organs
• 
 
the 12 cutaneous regions.
Relationship Between The Five Senses, The
Nine Orifices And The Internal Organs
The nine orifices are the two eyes, the two nostrils, the two ears,
the mouth, the urethra and the anus. The orifices according to
Chapter 37
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ are different:
The Five Yin Organs communicate internally with the seven
upper orifices. Lung-Qi communicates with the nose: when the
nose is in harmony we can detect smells. Liver-Qi
communicates with the eyes: if the eyes are in harmony we can
distinguish black from white [i.e. see]. Spleen-Qi communicates
with the mouth: when the mouth is in harmony we can taste
food. Heart-Qi communicates with the tongue: when the
tongue is in harmony we can taste the five flavours. Kidney-Qi
communicates with the ears: when the ears are in harmony we
can hear the five sounds. When the Five Yin Organs are not in
harmony the seven orifices are blocked.
 
4
Thus, the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ mentions only the seven upper
orifices but these differ from the list given above: they make up
seven only if we count the eyes and ears as two but the nose as
one. If we do this, the seven orifices are the two eyes, the two ears,
the nose, the mouth and the tongue. This is the most common way
of counting the upper orifices because it assigns them neatly to the
five Yin organs. The two lower orifices, being the urethra and anus,
are under the influence of the Kidneys.
Therefore the relationship between the nine orifices, the five
senses and the Internal Organs is as shown in 
Table P1.1
 
.
124
Table P1.1
Relationship between the nine orifices, the five senses and the
Internal Organs
Orifice
Sense
Yin organ
Eyes (2)
Sight
Liver
Ears (2)
Hearing
Kidneys
Nose (1)
Smell
Lungs
Mouth (1)
Taste
Spleen
Tongue (1)
Taste
Heart
Urethra (1)
 
Kidneys
Anus (1)
 
Kidneys
As can be seen, the sense of touch is not included and the sense
of taste is related both to the Spleen and the Heart. According to
the above passage from the ‘Classic of Difficulties’, the Spleen is
responsible for the sense of taste in general while the Heart is
responsible for distinguishing the five flavours (sweet, sour, bitter,
pungent and salty).
Chapter 59
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ also describes the five sense
organs as places where the energy of the Five Yin organs manifests
when there are changes in colour:
When the area between the eyebrows [top of nose] is thin and
moist, the disease is in the skin [i.e. Lungs]; when the lips are
greenish, yellow, red, white or black, the disease is in the
muscles [i.e. Spleen]; when the Nutritive Qi is moist, the
disease is in Blood [i.e. Heart]; when the eyes are greenish,
yellow, red, white or black, the disease is in the sinews [i.e.
Liver]; when the ear is dry and full of dirt [ear wax?], the
disease is in the bones [i.e. Kidneys].
 
5
Relationship Between Different Areas Of The
Face And The Internal Organs
Each area of the face reflects the state of an Internal Organ. The
‘Simple Questions’ (
Chapter 32
 
) and the ‘Spiritual Axis’ (
Chapter
49
 
) give two different views of these relationships. 
Chapter 32
 
of
the ‘Simple Questions’ mentions the correspondence of areas of
the face to the five Yin organs in the context of Heat diseases: ‘
In
125
Heat disease of the Liver, the left cheek becomes red; in Heat
disease of the Heart, the forehead becomes red, in Heat disease of
the Spleen, the nose becomes red; in Heat disease of the Lungs,
the right cheek becomes red; in Heat disease of the Kidneys, the
chin becomes red
 
.’
 
6
 
Figure P1.1
 
shows the correspondence of face
areas to Internal Organs according to the ‘Simple Questions’ and
Figure P1.2
 
that according to the ‘Spiritual Axis’.
FIG. P1.1
 
Correspondence of facial areas to the Internal Organs
according to the ‘Simple Questions’
126
FIG. P1.2
 
Correspondence of facial areas to the Internal Organs
according to the ‘Spiritual Axis’
The significance of the correspondence between areas of the face
and the Internal Organs in diagnosis will be explored in greater
detail later.
Relationship Between The Five Tissues And
The Internal Organs
Chapter 4
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ establishes the
correspondence between the five tissues and the five Yin organs.
This is as follows:
Lungs
skin
Spleen
muscles
Liver
sinews
Heart
blood vessels
Kidneys
bones
The Lungs influence the skin in so far as they diffuse the
127
Defensive Qi in the skin and the space between the skin and
muscles (cou li); the Lungs also control the opening and closing of
the pores and therefore sweating. The relationship between the
Lungs and skin is very clear in atopic patients who suffer from
both asthma and eczema.
The Spleen influences the muscles causing muscular weakness
when it is deficient. The Liver influence the sinews which include
tendons and cartilages: Liver-Blood, in particular, nourishes the
sinews in the joints and ensures that they are properly fed and
lubricated. The ‘sinews’ and their relationship with the Liver,
however, have a broader meaning in Chinese medicine. For
example, the nails are considered an extension of 
the sinews and
tremors or convulsions in a patient suffering from internal Wind
are said to be due to ‘shaking of the sinews’.
The Heart governs Blood and influences the state of the blood
vessels. The Kidneys influence the bones and bone marrow: in
particular, it is the Kidney-Essence that nourishes the bones and
bone marrow.
The five tissues readily show pathological states of their related
organs. When the Lungs are deficient, the space between the skin
and muscles is ‘open’ and the person may suffer from spontaneous
sweating and will be prone to invasions of external Wind.
When the Spleen is deficient, the person will experience
muscular weakness and general tiredness. If the Liver (and in
particular Liver-Blood) is deficient, the sinews become vulnerable
to invasion of Cold, Dampness or Wind; a deficiency of Liver-Blood
may also cause a contraction of the sinews. Liver-Blood stasis or
Liver-Qi stagnation may cause a stiffness of the sinews in the
joints, while Liver-Wind may cause tremors of the sinews.
A deficiency of Heart-Blood may cause a weakness of the blood
vessels while Heart-Blood stasis may cause a hardening of the
blood vessels. A deficiency of the Kidney-Essence may cause brittle
bones (osteoporosis).
Box P1.1
 
summarizes the five Yin organs and the five tissues.
 
BOX P1.1
 
   
 
THE FIVE YIN ORGANS AND
THE FIVE TISSUES
Lungs: skin (pores open)
Spleen: muscles (weak muscles)
128
Liver: sinews (vulnerable to external invasions, stiffness)
Heart: blood vessels (weakness or hardening)
Kidneys: bones (brittle bones)
Relationship Between The Five Sites Of Qi
Transportation And The Yin Organs
Chapter 4
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says,
The East wind comes in Spring and the Liver is often diseased
affecting the neck … The South wind comes in Summer and the
Heart is often diseased affecting the chest and hypochondrial
region. The West wind comes in Autumn and the Lungs are
often diseased affecting the upper back and shoulders. The
North wind comes in Winter and the Kidneys are often diseased
affecting the thighs and the lower back. The Centre corresponds
to Earth and the Spleen is often diseased affecting the spine.
 
7
Thus the ‘Five sites of Qi transportation’ (
Box P1.2
 
) where the Qi
of the five Yin organs accumulates are the neck, the chest, the
upper back and shoulders, the thighs and lower back and the
spine for the Liver, Heart, Lungs, Kidneys and Spleen respectively.
 
BOX P1.2
 
   
 
THE FIVE SITES OF QI
TRANSPORTATION
• 
 
Neck: Liver
• 
 
Chest: Heart
• 
 
Upper back and shoulders: Lungs
• 
 
Thighs and lower back: Kidneys
• 
 
Spine: Spleen
Most of these correspondences are confirmed in practice and
have some clinical relevance. For example, the neck is frequently
affected by Liver disharmonies such as Liver-Qi stagnation or
129
Liver-Yang rising causing a stiff neck; the relationship between the
Heart and the chest is well known; the upper back is frequently
affected by Lung disharmonies such as Lung-Heat, which may
cause a pain in this area; the thighs may become weak when the
energy of the Kidneys declines; the Spleen has an influence on the
spine and the point SP-3 Taibai may be used to straighten the
spine.
Manifestations Of The Five Yin Organs
Chapter 9
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says:
The Heart … manifests in the face, and nourishes the blood
vessels; the Lung … manifests in the body hair and nourishes
the skin; the Kidneys … manifest in the hair and nourish the
bones; the Liver … manifests in the nails and nourishes the
sinews; the flourishing of the Spleen, Stomach, Large Intestine,
Small Intestine, Triple Burner and Bladder … manifests in the
white skin around the lips, and nourishes the muscles.
 
8
The manifestation sites of the five Yin organs (
Box P1.3
 
) are well
known and widely used in practice. For example, the facial
complexion as a whole reflects the state of the Heart; the body hair
may become withered when the Lungs are weak; the hair becomes
dull and brittle when the Kidneys are deficient and grey when the
Kidney-Essence declines; the nails become brittle when Liver-
Blood is deficient; the lips may become dry when Spleen-Yin is
deficient or red when the Spleen has Heat.
 
BOX P1.3
 
   
 
MANIFESTATIONS OF THE
FIVE YIN ORGANS
• 
 
FACE: Heart
• 
 
BODY HAIR: Lungs
• 
 
HEAD HAIR: Kidneys
• 
 
NAILS: Liver
• 
 
LIPS: Spleen
130
The 12 Cutaneous Regions
Chapter 56
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says, ‘
The twelve cutaneous
regions follow the course of the twelve main channels.
 
’
 
9
 
The area
on the skin overlying each main channel constitutes its cutaneous
region (
Fig. P1.3
 
). This correspondence between wide skin
sections and the channels and Internal Organs is of course crucial
to many aspects of diagnosis by observation. The cutaneous region
of a particular channel reflects its pathologies and those of the
relevant organ. A pathology of the relevant channel may manifest
on the corresponding cutaneous region with pain, discoloration,
skin rashes, veins, venules, contraction of muscles, etc. Thus the
cutaneous regions are very immediate and important diagnostic
signs.
FIG. P1.3
 
The 12 cutaneous regions
The most important implication of the cutaneous regions is that
the influence of each channel is not restricted to its line of
trajectory but spreads over a broad area around the channel, so
that every part of the body is covered by a given channel.
The above discussion highlighted the various relationships
between the Internal Organs and external manifestations: it is
these relationships that make diagnosis by observation possible.
 
10
131
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:75 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:77 First published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 126.
4. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:91 First published c. 
AD
 
100
5. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 108
6. 
Simple Questions, p. 189.
7. 
Simple Questions, p. 23.
8. 
Simple Questions, p. 67.
9. 
Simple Questions, p. 290.
10. 
The main Chinese source for the discussion of observation
in Chinese diagnosis was Zhang Shu Sheng. Great Treatise
of Diagnosis by Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong
Hua Yi Xue Wang Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan:
Shanxi Science Publishing House, 1995.
132
SECTION 1
OBSERVATION
OF THE BODY,
MIND AND
COMPLEXION
133
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE BODY,
MIND AND
COMPLEXION
Section contents
1. 
 
Observation of the body shape, physique and demeanour
2. 
 
Observation of the Mind, Spirit and emotions
3. 
 
Observation of the complexion colour
4. 
 
Observation of body movements
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the body includes observation of the body’s shape,
physique, demeanour and movements. The first things we observe
as a patient comes in is probably the body shape, way of walking,
general appearance, demeanour and personality. One can
formulate a very good first impression of the patient’s
constitutional type in the first few minutes of the consultation
simply by observing the above features. There are various ways of
classifying body types and these are listed below bearing in mind
that ‘observation of the body’ includes observation of the body’s
134
shape, physique, demeanour and personality.
Before describing and discussing the various body shapes and
their clinical significance, we should first highlight two important
principles of diagnosis by observation, i.e. the principle of
correspondence between individual parts of the body and the
whole, and the importance of observing and assessing
constitutional traits. The latter is important because all the various
body types reflect not a patient’s actual, present disharmonies but
his or her constitutional traits.
Correspondence Between An Individual Part
And The Whole
One of the principles on which diagnosis by observation in
Chinese medicine is based is that each single, small part of the
body reflects the whole.
The face as a microsystem
The face is a very important example of this principle, as it is a
reflection both of the Internal Organs and of various parts of the
body. 
Chapter 32
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ lists the
correspondence of various parts of the face with Internal Organs,
as follows: ‘
 
In Heat disease of the Liver, the left cheek becomes red;
in Heat disease of the Heart, the forehead becomes red; in Heat
disease of the Spleen, the nose becomes red; in Heat disease of the
Lungs, the right cheek becomes red; in Heat disease of the Kidneys,
the chin becomes red.
 
’
 
1
 
(See 
Fig. P1.1
 
, 
p. 3
 
.)
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ gives a more detailed map of
the correspondence between Internal Organs and parts of the
body and various areas of the face.
 
2
 
(See 
Fig. P1.2
 
, 
p. 3
 
.)
135
FIG. P1S1.2
 
Microsystems of the body according to Dr Zhang Ying
Qing
A careful observation of these face areas and their colours is an
extremely important part of diagnosis by observation which
should be always carried out. The correspondence between face
areas and Internal Organs reveals three possible conditions:
 
• 
 
an actual disharmony, for example red cheeks may
indicate Heat in the Lungs
• 
 
a constitutional trait, for example short earlobes may
indicate weak Kidneys and short life
• 
 
an aetiological factor, for example a bluish colour on
the forehead (related to the Heart according to the
‘Simple Questions’ correspondences) in a child may
indicate prenatal shock.
136
The correspondence between face areas and Internal Organs
should be integrated with the colour of the complexion in those
areas and interpreted in the light of the Five Elements. For
example, a greenish colour in the face area corresponding to the
Spleen (i.e. the tip of the nose) indicates that the Liver is invading
the Spleen and that that particular Spleen disharmony is
secondary to a Liver disharmony.
The ear as a microsystem
Ear acupuncture is a well-known application of the principle that a
single, small part of the body reflects the whole: according to this
theory, the ear resembles an upside-down fetus and there is a point
in the ear pavilion that reflects a part or an organ of the body.
Microsystems over the whole body
According to recent theories, each part of the body is a miniature
replica of the whole and can therefore reflect pathological changes
of the whole body.
The following microsystems reflect this general hypothesis: ear
acupuncture, facial colour diagnosis, iris diagnosis, tongue
diagnosis, nose acupuncture, face acupuncture, foot acupuncture,
etc. According to modern Chinese research, a certain part of the
body can reflect the whole body: this principle can be used both in
diagnosis and in treatment. Diseases of different parts of the body
can be treated using points on a specific area of the body, such as
the ear, hand or nose. Chinese researchers have identified 102
microsystems in the body as follows:
 
• 
 
metacarpal bone system: 5 on each side, 10 in total
• 
 
hand phalangeal bone system: 14 on each side, 28 in
total
• 
 
radius system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
ulna system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
humerus system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
femur system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
tibia system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
fibula system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
metatarsal bone system: 5 on each side, 10 in total
137
• 
 
foot phalangeal bone system: 14 on each side, 28 in
total
• 
 
ear system: 1 on each side, 2 in total
• 
 
face system: 1
• 
 
nose system: 1
• 
 
tongue system: 1
• 
 
body trunk system: 1
• 
 
neck system: 1
• 
 
scalp system: 1 in the middle, 1 on each side, 3 in total
• 
 
eye system: 1 on each eye, 2 in total
• 
 
foot system: 1 on each foot, 2 in total.
 
3
This theory was first proposed by Zhang Ying Qing in 1973. In
diagnosing and needling the side of the second metacarpal bone,
he discovered that the points on this bone formed a pattern and
constituted a miniature of the whole body (
Fig. P1S1.1
 
).
FIG. P1S1.1
 
Microsystems of diagnosis
After repeated research, he discovered other microsystems all
over the body (
Fig. P1S1.2
 
).
138
Observation Of Constitutional Traits
The art of observation in Chinese medicine is based on two broad
areas: observation of constitutional traits and observation of actual
disharmony signs. For example, a tall, thin, sinewy body indicates
a constitutional Wood type but it does not necessarily indicate any
actual disharmony in the Liver or Gall-Bladder. Conversely, a
person may belong constitutionally to a Fire type but have a pale-
greenish complexion, brittle nails and dry hair indicating an actual
Wood disharmony (in this example Liver-Blood deficiency).
Why is it necessary to observe constitutional traits if we need to
treat the presenting disharmony? In the above example of a
patient with a pale-greenish complexion, brittle nails and dry hair,
we obviously need to nourish the Liver-Blood, whatever the
observation of constitutional characteristics might indicate.
However, observation of constitutional traits is important for
various reasons, described below.
1. 
 
A constitutional type indicates the 
tendency
 
to certain
disharmonies and it therefore allows us to forecast, and
accordingly to prevent, a possible pathological development. For
example, if a person with constitutional Yang excess suffers an
invasion of Wind-Heat and a febrile illness, we can expect that
person to have a strong tendency to develop an intense Heat
pattern. In terms of the Four Levels, we can foretell that that
person might enter the Qi level more quickly and with more Heat
than another person: this means that we should be prepared for
this and administer strong cooling herbs.
2. 
 
Observation of a constitutional type and tendency allows us to
put the presenting disharmony into perspective, helping us to
gauge its severity. For example, if a person with constitutional Yang
excess develops a Heat pattern, that is a less severe situation than
a Heat pattern in a person with constitutional Yin excess or
constitutional Yang deficiency.
3. 
 
Observation of constitutional traits and the deviation or
conformity of a person to his or her constitutional type gives us an
idea of the severity of a problem and therefore prognosis. For
example, it is better for a Wood type to have a Wood rather than a
Fire disharmony. So, if a Wood type suffers from a Fire disharmony,
this indicates a worse prognosis than that of a Fire type suffering
139
from a Fire disharmony or a Wood type suffering from a Wood
disharmony.
4. 
 
Observation of constitutional types is important to give patients
an underlying treatment, irrespective of the presenting
disharmony. It is always important to bear in mind the
constitutional type and treat it accordingly. In the above example,
if a person of a Wood type suffers from a Fire disharmony, it is
obviously necessary to treat the presenting disharmony, but,
perhaps afterwards, it would be good to treat also the Element
type, that is Wood. The treatment of the underlying Element type
is an important aspect of the preventive potential of Chinese
medicine and it should always be applied.
5. 
 
Treatment of the constitutional Element type is particularly
useful in the case of mental–emotional problems. For example, a
Wood type might display some typical emotional traits such as
indecision and inability to plan one’s life: treatment of the Wood
Element would help the person on a mental–emotional level,
whatever other disharmony that person might suffer from.
6. 
 
Observation of the constitutional type and tendency of a patient
allows us to forecast the type of disharmony that such a patient
might be subject to in the future: this means that the preventive
potential of Chinese medicine can be exploited to the full. For
example, if people in their 40s display signs of constitutional Yang
excess and also pertain to the Wood type, we know that such
people may have a strong tendency to develop Liver-Yang rising
with signs such as hypertension. This allows us to actively subdue
Yang and pacify Wood even in the absence of any clinical
manifestations.
7. 
 
Observation of the Element type is useful when a person
displays all the traits of a certain Element type except for one
detail; that is a bad sign even if that person may not suffer any
disharmony yet. For example, if a person displays all the
characteristics of the Fire type but walks slowly, this small detail
tells us that something is amiss and that that person may develop
a serious disharmony. This discrepancy might be particularly
relevant in the case of the Fire type as we know that a Fire type
may have a tendency to develop a serious pathology very suddenly.
Box P1S1.1
 
summarizes the important reasons for observing
140
constitutional traits.
 
BOX P1S1.1
 
   
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF
OBSERVING CONSTITUTIONAL
TRAITS
• 
 
A constitutional type indicates a 
tendency
 
to certain
disharmonies and therefore allows us to forecast and
prevent a possible pathological development during the
course of an illness.
• 
 
It allows us to put the presenting disharmony into
perspective and helps us to gauge its severity.
• 
 
Deviation or conformity of a person to his or her
constitutional type is a good measure of prognosis.
• 
 
It helps us to give patients a treatment appropriate to
the underlying constitution, irrespective of the
presenting disharmony.
• 
 
It is particularly useful in the treatment of mental–
emotional problems.
• 
 
It allows us to forecast the type of disharmony that a
patient might be subject to in the future and therefore
to treat the patient preventatively.
• 
 
Deviation from an Elemental type in one detail may
be a warning sign.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:189 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:97 First published c. 100
BC
3. 
Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang
Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan: Shanxi Science
Publishing House, 1995; 38.
141
CHAPTER 1
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE BODY
SHAPE, PHYSIQUE
AND DEMEANOUR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO YIN AND
YANG
Body shape abundant in Yang
Body shape abundant in Yin
Body shape deficient in Yang
Body shape deficient in Yin
Body shape with Yin and Yang in balance
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO THE FIVE
ELEMENTS
Wood type
142
Fire type
Earth type
Metal type
Water type
Clinical application of the Five Element types
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO
PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL INFLUENCES
Body shape with strong prenatal constitution
Body shape with weak prenatal constitution
Body shape with strong Postnatal Qi
Body shape with weak Postnatal Qi
CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO BODY BUILD
Robust type
Compact type
Muscular type
Thin type
Overweight type
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO PAIN AND
DRUG TOLERANCE
Body shape indicating high pain and drug
tolerance
Body shape indicating low pain and drug
tolerance
INTRODUCTION
The body shape of a person is determined by the prenatal
constitution and subsequent postnatal nourishment: for this
143
reason, the body shape of a person can give us an indication both
of the constitutional 
tendency
 
to a certain pathology and of an
actual pathology resulting from postnatal influences. Observation
of the body (including size, height, tone of skin and muscles,
length of bones, etc.), as well as of demeanour and personality, is
important to assess the constitution of a patient. 
Chapter 21
 
of the
“Simple Questions” says, “
 
In diagnosing diseases one should
observe whether the patient is extrovert or timid and observe the
state of the bones, muscles and skin in order to understand the
condition so that we can diagnose and treat
 
.”
 
1
 
There are five
different ways of classifying the body shape in Chinese medicine,
which are described below:
1. 
 
According to Yin and Yang:
— 
 
body shape abundant in Yang
— 
 
body shape abundant in Yin
— 
 
body shape deficient in Yang
— 
 
body shape deficient in Yin
— 
 
body shape with Yin and Yang in balance
2. 
 
According to the Five Elements:
— 
 
Wood type
— 
 
Fire type
— 
 
Earth type
— 
 
Metal type
— 
 
Water type
3. 
 
According to prenatal and postnatal influences:
— 
 
body shape with strong prenatal constitution
— 
 
body shape with weak prenatal constitution
— 
 
body shape with strong Postnatal Qi
— 
 
body shape with weak Postnatal Qi
4. 
 
According to body build:
— 
 
robust type
— 
 
compact type
— 
 
muscular type
— 
 
thin type
144
— 
 
overweight type
5. 
 
According to drug and pain tolerance:
— 
 
body shape indicating high drug and pain
tolerance
— 
 
body shape indicating low drug and pain
tolerance.
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE
ACCORDING TO YIN AND YANG
The possible body shapes according to Yin and Yang are:
 
• 
 
body shape abundant in Yang
• 
 
body shape abundant in Yin
• 
 
body shape deficient in Yang
• 
 
body shape deficient in Yin
• 
 
body shape with Yin and Yang in balance.
Chapter 31
 
of Volume 4 of the “Classic of Categories” (
Lei Jing
 
,
1624) summarizes the characteristics of people with a
constitutional excess of Yin, people with a constitutional excess of
Yang and people with a balance of Yin and Yang:
People gifted with pure Yin are known as the Greater-Yin type;
those with a mixture of Yin and Yang but more Yin than Yang
are known as the Lesser-Yin type; those with pure Yang are
known as the Greater-Yang type; those with a mixture of Yin
and Yang but more Yang than Yin are known as the Lesser-Yang
type. Together with the type of people with equal Yang and Yin,
these constitute the five different types of people. Therefore, for
people with abundant-Yang constitution, it is advisable to use
cooling methods of treatment. For people with abundant-Yin
constitution, it is advisable to use warming methods of
treatment.
 
2
145
Body Shape Abundant In Yang
Observation
The body shape, demeanour and personality of a person with
abundant Yang are as follows: strong body build, tendency to a red
face, preference for cold, intolerance of heat, preference for light
clothes, lively character, active and talkative nature, loud voice,
tendency to laugh, tendency to being a high achiever, decisiveness,
assertiveness, walking with the chest and stomach projecting
forward (
Fig. 1.1
 
).
FIG. 1.1
 
Body shape abundant in Yang
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned features indicate abundant Yang (which
could be of the Greater-Yang or Lesser-Yang type, as described in
the quotations below). It is important to stress that such a body
shape indicates only a constitutional 
tendency
 
to excess of Yang and
not necessarily an actual pattern of Yang excess. In pathological
conditions, a person with an abundant-Yang constitution will have
a tendency to excess of Yang, that is, Heat or Fire. In treatment,
146
emphasis should be put on reducing Yang and nourishing Yin.
Quotations from the classics
The “Spiritual Axis” in 
Chapter 72
 
says:
A Greater-Yang type of person looks arrogant with the chest
and stomach projected forward as if the body was bending
backwards. This is the picture of a Greater-Yang type of
person. A Lesser-Yang type of person holds the head high while
standing, and shakes the body while walking. The two hands
are often held behind the body with the arms and elbows
exposed on the side of the body. This is the picture of a Lesser-
Yang type of person.
 
3
A Greater-Yang type of person has excess of Yang and
deficiency of Yin and it is necessary to examine them with great
care and treat them so that the Yin is not reduced to the point
of collapse. The Yang must be reduced but not excessively to the
point of collapse, lest the patient develops madness.
 
4
Chapter 67
 
of the same book says:
A person with abundant Yang is emotional and as warm as fire;
he talks fast and is swollen with arrogance. It is because the
Heart- and Lung-Qi of such a person are abundant; Yang-Qi is
therefore plentiful and flows freely and vigorously. For this
reason, it is easy to stimulate his spirit, and the Qi arrives
quickly when acupuncture is given.
 
5
The “Golden Mirror of Medicine” (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
, 1742) points
out in the chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods”:
People with abundant Yang hold their head high while standing
because it is in the nature of Yang to rise. They shake their body
while walking because it is in the nature of Yang to move. They
often hold their hands behind the body with the arms and
elbows by the sides of the body as it is in the nature of Yang to
147
be exposed. This is the picture of the personality of the Lesser-
Yang type of people.
 
6
The same book says:
The six external pathogenic factors attack people in the same
way but diseases caused by them will have different
manifestations in different people. Why? The reason is that a
person’s body can be either strong or weak, Qi can be full or
deficient, and the internal organs can be of cold or hot. After
the external pathogenic factors invade the body, they will
transform according to the condition of the internal organs.
Therefore, the syndromes vary. They can transform into
deficient or excessive conditions, and into cold or hot
conditions.
 
7
This last quotation highlights an important principle of Chinese
medicine: pathogenic factors tend to develop in their pathology
according to the pre-existing constitution of the person. For
example, if a person who is constitutionally abundant in Yang
suffers an invasion of external Wind, this will develop into Wind-
Heat, while if a person who is constitutionally abundant in Yin
suffers the same invasion, the external Wind will manifest as
Wind-Cold.
Body Shape Abundant In Yin
Observation
The typical characteristics of a person of the abundant-Yin type
are: a tendency to obesity, relatively dark complexion, loose
muscles with thick skin, quiet, reticent and introverted nature, soft
voice, a preference for heat and a desire to wrap up warm (
Fig. 1.2
).
148
FIG. 1.2
 
Body shape abundant in Yin
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned features indicate an abundant-Yin
constitution. It is important to stress that such a body shape
indicates only a constitutional 
tendency
 
to excess of Yin and not
necessarily an actual pattern of Yin excess. In pathological
conditions, a person with an abundant-Yin constitution will have a
tendency to excess of Yin, that is, Cold, Dampness or Phlegm.
Common patterns appearing in people with an abundant-Yin
constitution include Cold, Dampness, Damp-Phlegm, Cold-
Phlegm, Phlegm-Fluids, Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, etc. In
treatment, emphasis should be put on reducing Yin, expelling
Cold, resolving Dampness and Phlegm and tonifying Yang. At the
same time, attention should be paid to regulating Qi and
invigorating Blood.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 72
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
Persons of the Greater-Yin type have a sombre countenance
149
and pretend to be humble. They have the body build of a
grown-up, but make themselves smaller by bending their back
and knees slightly. This is the picture of a Greater-Yin type of
person … They are restless while standing, and walk as if to
hide themselves. This is the picture of a Lesser-Yin type of
person.
 
8
…
Persons of the Greater-Yin type are constitutionally excessive
in Yin and deficient in Yang. Their Yin and Blood are thick and
turbid. Their Defensive Qi does not flow freely. Yin and Yang
are not in a harmonious state, which leads to loose sinews and
thick skin. When needling patients with an abundant-Yin
constitution, only through reducing the Yin quickly and
immediately can an improvement be expected.
 
9
…
The Yellow Emperor asks: “How is it that sometimes the body
will react only after several acupuncture treatments?” Qi Bo
answers, “Such a person is excessive in Yin and deficient in
Yang. The movement of Qi is restrained and therefore it is
difficult for Qi to arrive when the patient is needled. This is the
reason why the body will react to the acupuncture only after
several treatments.
 
10
The last passage clearly relates the ease or difficulty with which
a patient reacts to acupuncture to the relative balance of Yin and
Yang: patients with a constitutional abundance of Yin will react to
acupuncture more slowly.
Body Shape Deficient In Yang
Observation
The typical characteristics of a person with the deficient-Yang type
of body shape are as follows: overweight/swollen body, pale or
150
pale-bluish complexion, listlessness, low spirits, slow movement,
weak, loose muscles, a preference for warmth, aversion to cold,
cold limbs and a desire to wrap up (
Fig. 1.3
 
).
FIG. 1.3
 
Body shape deficient in Yang
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned body appearance indicates that the patient
is constitutionally deficient in Yang. It is important to stress that
such body shape indicates only a constitutional 
tendency
 
to Yang
deficiency: it does not necessarily follow that every person with
such a body shape actually suffers from Yang deficiency.
When such a constitutional tendency does manifest with an
actual Yang deficiency, these people will suffer symptoms of Cold,
Cold-Dampness, Cold Phlegm, Damp-Phlegm and Phlegm-Fluids.
Body Shape Deficient In Yin
Observation
The typical characteristics of a person with a deficient-Yin type of
body shape are as follows: thin body build, sometimes red cheeks
and lips, an excited look, a restless expression in eyes, a propensity
151
to be excited, a feeling of heat and quick movements. People of
Yin-deficient body shape are often deficient in Yin and excessive in
Yang. The body is thin and tall with a long-shaped 
head, thin long
neck, narrow shoulders and a narrow, long, flat chest. These people
often bend forward when they walk or stand (
Fig. 1.4
 
).
FIG. 1.4
 
Body shape deficient in Yin
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned features indicate a deficient-Yin
constitution. It is important to stress that such a body shape
indicates only a constitutional 
tendency
 
to deficiency of Yin and not
necessarily an actual pattern of Yin deficiency. In pathology, these
patients will tend to Yin or Essence deficiency and hyperactivity of
Yang. When they fall ill, they will easily develop Empty-Heat or
Dryness.
Body Shape With Yin And Yang In Balance
Observation
152
The body shape with harmony of Yin and Yang is of medium build,
not too tall or short, neither too stout nor thin. The movements are
balanced and the personality is stable. People with such a
constitution are better able to adapt themselves to changes caused
by the stresses of life (
Fig. 1.5
 
).
FIG. 1.5
 
Body shape with harmony of Yin and Yang
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned features indicate a harmony of Yin and
Yang. These people are less easily attacked by external pathogenic
factors. When they do fall ill, the pathogenic factors are often not
strong, the location of the disease is superficial and the disease
itself is mild.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 72
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: “
 
People with the body
shape with harmony of Yin and Yang look elegant and graceful.
 
”
 
11
153
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE
ACCORDING TO THE FIVE ELEMENTS
The body shapes according to the Five Elements are:
 
• 
 
Wood type
• 
 
Fire type
• 
 
Earth type
• 
 
Metal type
• 
 
Water type.
Wood Type
Observation
People of the Wood type have a subtle shade of green in their
complexion, a relatively small head and long-shaped face, broad
shoulders, straight back, tall, sinewy body and elegant hands and
feet. In terms of personality, they have developed intelligence but
their physical strength is poor. Hard workers, they think things
over and tend to worry (
Fig. 1.6
 
, see also 
Plates 1.1
 
and 
1.2 on p. P1
).
154
FIG. 1.6
 
Wood type: (a) face; (b) body
Clinical significance
People of the Wood type often suffer from diseases caused by
pathogenic factors in autumn and winter. They are in relatively
good health in spring and summer.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 64
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
155
The Wood type of people correspond to Shang Jiao of the note
Jiao, which is one of the five notes and is related to the element
of Wood. Their complexion colour is similar to that of the Green
Emperor, who is one of the five heavenly emperors, and
represents the East. Their complexion has a subtle green colour,
they have a small head, long-shaped face, broad back and
shoulders, straight body trunk and small hands and feet. They
are intelligent, and keep their mind working hard. They are not
strong physically. The are often worried. They like Spring and
Summer and dislike Autumn and Winter.
 
12
…
People of the Wood type can tolerate Spring and Summer but
not Autumn or Winter. In Autumn or Winter, they suffer from
diseases caused by invasion of pathogenic factors.
 
13
The chapter “Key to the Four Diagnostic Methods” in the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
, 1742) says:
People of the Wood type respond to the colour green, which is
at its best when, like green wood, there is moisture in it. People
of the Wood type have a straight body just like the trunk of a
tree. They have the so-called five kinds of Smallness, i.e. a small
head, small hands and small feet, just like the twigs of a tree.
They have the so-called five kinds of Thinness and Length,
implying a long, thin body trunk and limbs, like the branches of
a tree. Just as wood has various uses and can be cut in different
ways as wanted, people of the Wood type are versatile, and are
apt to intellectual work. Just as wood is seldom quiet [i.e.
always swaying in wind and breeze], people of the Wood type
tend to worry, and are often exhausted by what they do. If
wood is not straight but is short and soft, it is not good timber
for use.
 
14
Box 1.1
 
summarizes the characteristics of the Wood type.
 
156
BOX 1.1
 
   
 
WOOD TYPE
• 
 
Greenish complexion
• 
 
Small head
• 
 
Long face
• 
 
Broad shoulders
• 
 
Straight back
• 
 
Sinewy body
• 
 
Tall
• 
 
Small hands and feet
Fire Type
Observation
People of the Fire type have a red, florid complexion, wide teeth, a
pointed, small head, possibly with a pointed chin, hair that is
either curly or scanty, well-developed muscles of the shoulders,
back, hips and head and relatively small hands and feet. In terms
of personality, they are keen thinkers. The Fire type is quick,
energetic and active. They are short-tempered. They walk firmly
and shake their body while walking. They tend to think too much
and often worry. They have a good spirit of observation and they
analyse things deeply (
Fig. 1.7
 
, see also 
Plate 1.3 on p. P1
 
).
157
FIG. 1.7
 
Fire type: (a) face; (b) body
Clinical significance
People of the Fire type are healthy in spring and summer but sick
in autumn and winter from invasion of pathogenic factors. When
compared with other Elemental types, people of the Fire type may
tend to suffer a sudden death.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 64
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
158
People of the Fire type correspond to Shang Zhi of the note Zhi,
which is one of the five notes, and is related to the element of
Fire. The colour of their complexion is similar to that of the Red
Emperor, who was one of the five heavenly emperors, and
represents the South. They have a red complexion, wide teeth, a
thin small face, small head, well-developed and nice-looking
shoulders, back, thighs and abdomen. They have small hands
and feet. They walk with quick steps but tread the ground
softly and soundlessly, and their body shakes as they walk.
They are short-tempered. They act boldly and make light of
money, but they are not trustworthy. They worry too much.
They have a good sense of judgment. The colour of their
complexion is attractive, but they are short-tempered. They like
Spring and Summer and dislike Autumn and Winter.
 
15
…
People of the Fire type have a short life often ending with a
sudden death. They can tolerate Spring and Summer but not
Autumn or Winter. In Autumn or Winter they will suffer from
diseases caused by invasion of pathogenic factors.
 
16
The chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods” of the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” says:
People of the Fire type have a red complexion which is best
when it is also bright [i.e. with shen]. They have the so-called
Five Pointed Structures, i.e. a pointed head, forehead, nose, face
and mouth: they are similar to the pointed shape of a flame
when it flares up … People of the Fire type are bold and daring
because Fire is Yang in nature and rich in Qi. They make light of
money, which is similar to the scattering nature of Fire. They
are not trustworthy for just like a fire they are constantly
changing. They tend to worry, mirroring the flickering of a
flame. They move constantly just like a fire which is always
moving. They are short-tempered, sharing fire’s quickness and
159
suddenness. If these people have symptoms of mental confusion
and abnormality of Qi and colour, it means that their body is
in disharmony.
 
17
Box 1.2
 
summarizes the characteristics of the Fire type.
 
BOX 1.2
 
   
 
FIRE TYPE
• 
 
Red complexion
• 
 
Wide teeth
• 
 
Pointed, small head
• 
 
Well-developed shoulder muscles
• 
 
Curly hair or not much hair
• 
 
Small hands and feet
• 
 
Walking briskly
Earth Type
Observation
People of the Earth type have a yellowish complexion, round-
shaped face, relatively big head, wide jaws, well-developed and
nice-looking shoulders and back, large abdomen, strong thigh and
calf muscles, relatively small hands and feet, and well-built
muscles of the whole body. They walk with firm steps without
lifting 
their feet very high. The Earth type is calm and generous,
has a steady character, likes to help people and is not
overambitious. It is easy to get on with (
Fig. 1.8
 
, see also 
Plate 1.4
on p. P1
 
).
160
FIG. 1.8
 
Earth type: (a) face; (b) body
Clinical significance
People of the Earth type are in relatively good health in autumn
and winter. They fall prey easily to invasions of pathogenic factors
in spring and summer.
Quotations from the classics
161
Chapter 64
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
The Earth type of people correspond to Shang Gong of the note
Gong which is one of the five notes, and is related to the
element of Earth. Their complexion is similar in colour to that
of the Yellow Emperor, who is one of the five heavenly emperors
and represents the Centre. They have a yellow complexion,
round-shaped face, large head and well-developed and nice-
looking shoulders and back. The abdomen is large and their
thighs and legs strong and well-built. They have small hands
and feet, but well-developed muscles. Every part of their body,
from the upper to the lower, is well proportioned. They walk
steadily, and are trustworthy. They are calm and like to help
people. They are not interested in pursuing power or position.
They like to establish good relations with other people. They
like Autumn and Winter and dislike Spring and Summer.
 
18
The chapter “Key to the Four Diagnostic Methods” of the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” says:
People of the Earth type respond to the yellow colour, which is
best when it is also shiny. They have the so-called Five Kinds of
Roundness similar to the round shape of the Earth. They have
the so-called Five Kinds of Solidity and Thickness which in
nature resemble the solid Earth. They have the so-called Five
Kinds of Shortness which is similar to the appearance of the
Earth being solid and short. Although people with the Earth
type of body have the characteristics of roundness, solidity,
thickness and shortness, each person will have a particular,
individual shape. The round face, the big head, the large
abdomen and the well-built shoulders and legs all resemble the
dense and solid appearance of the Earth. People of the Earth
type are sincere and trustworthy. They take their time in doing
things. They are calm at heart. All these characteristics mirror
the nature of Earth in being honest and reliable.
 
19
162
Box 1.3
 
summarizes the characteristics of the Earth type.
 
BOX 1.3
 
   
 
EARTH TYPE
• 
 
Yellowish complexion
• 
 
Round face
• 
 
Wide jaws
• 
 
Large head
• 
 
Well-developed shoulders and back
• 
 
Large abdomen
• 
 
Large thighs and calf muscles
• 
 
Well-built muscles
Metal Type
Observation
People of the Metal type have a relatively pale complexion, a
square-shaped face, a relatively small head, small shoulders and
upper back, a relatively flat abdomen, and small hands and feet.
They have a strong voice, move swiftly and have keen powers of
thought. They are honest and upright. They are generally quiet and
calm in a solid way, but also capable of decisive action when
necessary. They have a natural aptitude for leadership and
management (
Fig. 1.9
 
, see also 
Plate 1.5 on p. P2
 
).
163
FIG. 1.9
 
Metal type: (a) face; (b) body
Clinical significance
People of the Metal type are in relatively good health in autumn
and winter, but may suffer ill health in spring and summer.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 64
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
People of the Metal type correspond to Shang [a musical note]
while keeping still, but are intrepid and fierce when active.
They have a natural aptitude for leadership and management
… People of the Metal type correspond to Shang, which is one
of the five notes and is related to the element of Metal. Their
complexion is similar to that of the White Emperor, who is one
of the five heavenly emperors and represents the West. They
have a relatively pale complexion, a small head, small
shoulders and upper back, a flat abdomen, and small hands and
feet. They have strong heels as if the bones grew outside rather
than in. They are quick and swift in movement, and are honest
and upright in personality. They are short-tempered. They
164
appear quiet and calm when keeping still, but fierce and bold
once they make a move. They have the talent to be officials.
They like Autumn and Winter and dislike Spring and Sumner.
 
20
…
People of the Metal type can tolerate Autumn and Winter but
not Spring or Summer when they may suffer diseases from
invasion of external pathogenic factors.
 
21
The chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods” of the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” says:
People of the Metal type correspond to the colour white and
their complexion is best when it is pure. They have the so-
called Five Kinds of Squareness similar to the square structure
of metal. They have the so-called Five Kinds of Moisture
similar to the quality of metal under water. Individuals who
deviate from the typical characteristic of Metal may not
display square and regular features. If the muscles become
thinner, their bones will show. These are all signs of
exhaustion. People of the Metal type are quiet and calm when
keeping still but fierce once in action. This mirrors the nature of
metal which is silent and resilient. People of this kind are
honest and upright as metal is pure and strong in quality. As
officials, people of the Metal type are awesome and dignified
just as metal is solemn.
 
22
Box 1.4
 
summarizes the characteristics of the Metal type.
 
BOX 1.4
 
   
 
METAL TYPE
• 
 
Pale complexion
• 
 
Square face
• 
 
Small head
• 
 
Small shoulders and upper back
• 
 
Flat abdomen
• 
 
Strong voice
165
Water Type
Observation
People of the Water type have a relatively dark complexion,
wrinkles, a relatively big head, a round face and body, broad
cheeks, narrow and small shoulders and a large abdomen. They
keep their body in motion while walking and find it difficult to
keep still. They 
have a long spine. The Water type is sympathetic
and slightly laid-back. They are good negotiators and loyal to their
work colleagues. They are aware and sensitive (
Fig. 1.10
 
, see also
Plates 1.6
 
and 
1.7 on p. P2
 
).
FIG. 1.10
 
Water type: (a) face; (b) body
Clinical significance
People of the Water type are often in relatively good health in
autumn and winter but not in spring or summer when they may
suffer diseases from invasion of external pathogenic factors.
Quotations from the classics
166
Chapter 64
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
People of the Water type correspond to Shang Yu of the note Yu,
which is one of the five notes and is related to the Water
element. Their complexion is similar in colour to that of the
Black Emperor, who was one of the heavenly emperors and
represents North. They have a relatively dark complexion,
wrinkled face, a big head, broad cheeks, small shoulders and a
large abdomen. Their hands and feet are seldom at rest, and
their body quivers while walking. They have a long spine. They
like Autumn and Winter and dislike Spring and Summer.
 
23
The chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods” in the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” says:
People of the Water type correspond to the colour purple, and
their complexion is best when it possesses lustre. Their face is
fat and uneven just as the sea’s surface is vast and rolling with
waves. They have the so-called Five Kinds of Fatness just as
water is wide. They have the so-called Five Kinds of Tenderness
mirroring the moistness of water. They have the so-called Five
Kinds of Smoothness resembling the clear nature of water. With
a fat body build, people of the Water type tend to have a mobile
body when they walk, mirroring the flowing movement of
water. This kind of people have no respect for anybody nor do
they fear; like water, they always run to a lower place. They
pretend to be humble but actually tend to be deceivers; water,
too, feels empty and lacking a solid structure.
 
24
Box 1.5
 
summarizes the characteristics of the Water type.
 
BOX 1.5
 
   
 
WATER TYPE
• 
 
Dark complexion
• 
 
Wrinkly skin
• 
 
Large head
• 
 
Broad cheeks
• 
 
Narrow shoulders
• 
 
Large abdomen
167
• 
 
Long spine
Clinical Application Of The Five Element
Types
The first thing to note is that very few people will display all the
characteristics of a “pure” Element type as there will always be
deviations from the ideal type caused by life influences. For
example, the Wood type should have a tall and slender body;
however, if they overeat they may develop a large abdomen. It is
important, therefore, when evaluating an Element type, to take
into account all physical and behavioural characteristics of the
patient. In the above example, if we drew a conclusion only from
observation of the large abdomen, we might wrongly conclude that
that person is an Earth type. Vice versa, an Earth type should have
a relatively large abdomen and large thighs: however, if they lose
weight due to a serious disease such as cancer, they may not have a
large abdomen and thighs and we should pay attention to all the
other physical characteristics.
Secondly, each Element type should have a strong point (
Box 1.6
) and a weakness in that area indicates a poor prognosis. For
example, people of the Wood type should have strong sinews; if
they do not, it indicates a possible illness. People of the Fire type
should walk fast and their strong point should be the Heart and
blood vessels; for the Fire type to walk slowly indicates a potential
problem. People of the Earth type should have strong muscles; if
they do not it indicates a weakness in the Stomach and Spleen and
the tendency to rheumatism. People of the Metal type should walk
slowly and deliberately and their voice should be strong; if they
walk fast and their voice is weak it indicates a potential problem.
People of the Water type should have strong Kidneys and may
easily suffer from overindulgence in sexual activity.
 
BOX 1.6
 
   
 
STRONG POINTS OF
ELEMENT TYPES
• 
 
Wood: strong sinews
168
• 
 
Fire: strong heart and blood vessels
• 
 
Earth: strong muscles
• 
 
Metal: strong voice
• 
 
Water: strong Kidneys
Thirdly, patients should be observed carefully and their Element
type assessed so that deviations from the type can be noted. If a
person has a certain trait which is unrelated to the person’s
particular type, the prognosis is worse than if the trait represents
an exaggeration of a trait that is normal for that type. For example,
people of the Fire type should walk fast; if they walk too fast it is
not so bad as a Metal type walking fast (as the Metal type should
walk slowly and deliberately). Another example: if a Metal type has
too loud a voice, it is not so bad as another type having a loud
voice.
Finally, the prognosis is better if a person of a certain Element
type suffers from a disharmony in the same Element rather than in
another Element. For example, it is better for a Wood type to suffer
from a disharmony in this (for example Liver-Qi stagnation) than
in another Element (for example Lung-Qi deficiency, Heart-Fire,
Spleen-Yang deficiency or Kidney-Yin deficiency).
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE
ACCORDING TO PRENATAL AND
POSTNATAL INFLUENCES
The body shapes according to prenatal and postnatal influences
are as follows:
 
• 
 
body shape with strong prenatal constitution
• 
 
body shape with weak prenatal constitution
• 
 
body shape with strong Postnatal Qi
• 
 
body shape with weak Postnatal Qi.
169
Body Shape With Strong Prenatal
Constitution
Observation
People with a strong prenatal constitution have a full and broad
forehead and glabella (the frontal bone between the eyebrows).
Their nose is long and wide. The area from the cheek to the front
of the ear is wide with well-developed muscles. The lower jaw is
high, thick and protruding. The ear is long, wide and regular-
shaped with long ear-lobes. The eyes, nose, ears and mouth are
well spaced and in the right proportion to each other. The philtrum
(the vertical depression between the nose and mouth) is long. The
complexion is normal in colour and lustrous. Breathing is even and
smooth. The bones, muscles and skin are strong. The whole body
is full of life.
Clinical significance
The above features indicate a good prenatal constitution: when
this person is ill, the disease is easy to treat. 
People with a strong
prenatal constitution generally have a long life and they are able to
survive even serious illnesses. A strong prenatal constitution often
explains why one person can survive a serious disease such as
cancer, where another person does not. A person with a strong
constitution may also “get away with” living in an unhealthy way
and still live a long life. Of course, it is also possible to ruin a good
prenatal constitution through unhealthy living. A good prenatal
constitution is very often the crucial determining factor in
prognosis.
To summarize, the main features indicating a good prenatal
constitution are as follows (
Fig. 1.11
 
):
170
FIG. 1.11
 
Good prenatal constitution
 
• 
 
broad forehead and glabella
• 
 
long and wide nose
• 
 
full cheeks
• 
 
strong lower jaw
• 
 
long ears with long ear-lobes
• 
 
well-proportioned eyes, nose, ears and mouth
• 
 
long philtrum
• 
 
normal complexion with lustre
• 
 
even and smooth breathing
• 
 
firm muscles and skin.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 37
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
A life as long as 100 years can be expected if the forehead and
glabella are full and broad; the cheek and the area from the
cheek to the front of the ear have well-developed muscles and
protrude from the face, connecting a strong lower jaw and long
171
ear lobes together; the eyes, nose, ears and mouth are well
spaced and well proportioned; the face colour is normal. These
people have abundant Qi and Blood. Their skin and muscles are
strong. They respond well to acupuncture treatment.
 
25
Chapter 54
 
of the same book says:
A person will have a long life if the five Yin organs are strong,
blood circulates normally without obstruction, the skin is firm,
the circulation of Nutritive and Defensive Qi is normal,
breathing is regular, Qi circulates smoothly, and the six Yang
organs transform and transport the food essences and body
fluids smoothly to all parts of the body, maintaining its normal
physiological functions … People with long life expectancy
have long and deep nostrils. The muscles of the cheek and of the
area from the cheek to the front of the ear are thick and high
and well formed. The circulation of Nutritive and Defensive Qi
is smooth. The upper, middle and lower parts of the face are in
the right proportion, with well-developed and distinct muscles
and prominent bones. People of this type can live out their
normal life expectancy, or even up to the age of 100.
 
26
Chapter 6
 
says:
People with a strong body build and relaxed skin, in whom Qi
flows smoothly, will live a long life; while those with a strong
body build but tense skin, in whom Qi stagnates, will die
young. A strong build, a big pulse and a firm Exterior and
Interior are signs of longevity; a strong build but a weak,
empty pulse, a deficient Interior and a strong Exterior, with
empty Qi, indicate a short life. A strong build but hollow, small
zygomatic bones indicate weak bones and a short life
expectancy; a strong build with well-developed muscles
indicates long life; a strong build but with weak and
underdeveloped muscles indicates a short life. These are all
signs of pre-natal constitution which give an indication of life
172
expectancy. As medical practitioners, we must understand the
connection between body build and body shape so that we may
have an idea of the patient’s life expectancy.
 
27
The chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods” in the
“Golden Mirror of Medicine” says: “
 
If the forehead is high, the
glabella is full, the nose is high and straight, the cheeks are full and
the skeleton is well built, the person will have a long life
expectancy.
 
”
 
28
Body Shape With Weak Prenatal
Constitution
Observation
The physical features of people with a weak prenatal constitution
are as follows: the eyes, nose, ears and mouth are close together;
the forehead is narrow and the space between the eyebrows small;
the nose is narrow with nostrils turned up and exposed; the
philtrum is short; the cheek and the area between the cheek and
the front of the ears are narrow; the ears are short, small and
turning outwards; the lower jaw is flat, sunken, low and narrow;
breathing is coarse and the skin is loose (
Fig. 1.12
 
).
173
FIG. 1.12
 
Weak prenatal constitution
Clinical significance
When the above-mentioned physical features are observed, they
indicate that the person has a poor prenatal constitution. These
people will have a tendency to suffer from a deficiency of Qi,
Blood, Yin or Yang. Compared with people with a strong prenatal
constitution, these people are more easily invaded by external
pathogenic factors and, when this occurs, the treatment will be
relatively more difficult.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 37
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
When the five senses are not sharp, the forehead and glabella
are narrow, the nose is small, the area between the cheek and
the front of the ears is narrow, the lower jaw is flat and the
ears turn outwards, the pre-natal constitution is poor even
though the complexion and colour may be normal. These people
are intrinsically unhealthy, even more so when they are ill.
 
29
174
Chapter 54
 
of the same book says:
When the five Yin organs are weak, the nostrils are small and
splay outwards, breathing is shallow, the cheek muscles are
sunken, the pulse is thin and weak and the muscles are loose,
the person is easily invaded by Wind-Cold. As a result, Qi and
Blood become more deficient, and the circulation in the vessels
is impaired, which will predispose the person to further
invasions of pathogenic factors.
 
30
Body Shape With Strong Postnatal Qi
Observation
Physical features indicating strong Postnatal Qi are as follows:
ruddy complexion with lustre, strong body build with solid
muscles and firm, elastic skin, shiny 
hair with moisture, vigour
and swift movements (
Fig. 1.13
 
).
FIG. 1.13
 
Strong Postnatal Qi
175
Note that the features indicating strong Prenatal Qi relate more
to the actual structure of the face, ears, nose, eyes and mouth and
to the body build (i.e. inherited features), while the features
indicating strong Postnatal Qi relate to lustre, hair, muscles (i.e.
features subject to the state of Qi and Blood).
Clinical significance
The above features indicate a good Postnatal Qi. The Spleen and
Stomach are strong, and they function properly. Qi, Blood, Yin and
Yang are abundant and the body will not be easily attacked by
external pathogenic factors. If there is any disease, it will be easy
to treat.
Quotations from the classics
The chapter “On the Pre-natal and Post-natal” of the “Complete
Works of Jing Yue” (
Jing Yue Quan Shu
 
, 1624) says:
If the pre-natal constitution is good, life will be long; if the pre-
natal constitution is weak, life may be short. If people with a
good pre-natal constitution take care of their post-natal Qi
[with a good lifestyle and diet], they may live even longer; if
people with a poor pre-natal constitution do not take care of
their post-natal Qi [instead following a poor lifestyle and diet],
their life may be even shorter. The build of the skeleton depends
on the pre-natal constitution, while the build of the muscles
depends on the post-natal Qi. The spirit [Shen] reflects the pre-
natal constitution, while the complexion reflects the post-natal
Qi. A deep colour of the complexion indicates long life, while a
tender, light colour may indicate a short life. A strong, loud
voice may indicate a long life, while a feeble voice may indicate
a short one. A strong body build may indicate a long life while
a weak body build may indicate a short one. One should also
differentiate the mental state, paying attention to whether it is
calm or restless: a calm mental state may indicate long life
while a restless mental state may indicate a short one. As for
the development of the body in youth, if a person appears weak
176
when young, but grows stronger as he or she grows up, it is a
good sign.
 
31
Body Shape With Weak Postnatal Qi
Observation
The physical features of people with weak Postnatal Qi are as
follows: poor energy, haggard, sallow complexion, dry, withered
hair, a thin, small build and loose skin without elasticity (
Fig. 1.14
).
FIG. 1.14
 
Weak Postnatal Qi
Note that the features indicating weak Prenatal Qi relate more
to the actual structure of the face, ears, nose, eyes and mouth and
to the body build (i.e. inherited features), while the features
indicating weak Postnatal Qi relate to lustre, hair, muscles (i.e.
features subject to the state of Qi and Blood).
Clinical significance
177
When the above-mentioned physical features are observed, it
indicates that the person has weak Postnatal Qi. The Spleen and
Stomach are weak and Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang are deficient. The
body will be easily invaded by pathogenic factors and any diseases
will be of a deficient nature.
Quotations from the classics
The “Complete Works of Jing Yue” says:
A person’s life expectancy is determined by their pre-natal
constitution. If the pre-natal constitution is good and the
person receives good post-natal Qi, life expectancy may be
long. If the pre-natal constitution is deficient, and the post-
natal Qi is poor, life expectancy will be short. If people pay
attention to this [i.e. influencing the pre-natal constitution
through the post-natal nourishment], those with a short life
expectancy can increase it. If people neglect these factors [i.e.
they ruin their pre-natal constitution through poor post-natal
Qi], those with a high life expectancy can decrease it. What we
are born with [i.e. our pre-natal constitution] can exceed what
we can reach by our efforts [i.e. our post-natal Qi]; conversely,
what can be reached by our efforts [i.e. our post-natal Qi] can
exceed what we were born with [i.e. our pre-natal
constitution]. The pre-natal constitution is largely determined
by that of the parents while the post-natal Qi is determined by
our own efforts.
 
32
 
!
Remember:
 
make an assessment of the constitution of
the patient from the observation of the body shape. A
strong or weak post- or prenatal constitution gives us
an immediate idea of the patient’s general health and
prognosis.
178
CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO
BODY BUILD
Chapters 38
 
and 
59
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” describe five types of
body shape: robust, compact, muscular, thin and overweight. The
physical characteristics of these five types generally coincide with
those according to Yin and Yang mentioned above; for example,
the robust type has a tendency to abundance of Yang, the thin type
has a tendency to deficiency of Blood or Yin, the overweight type
has a tendency to deficiency of Yang, etc.
The five body shapes described in these chapters of the
“Spiritual Axis” indicate inherited constitutional traits and not
acquired ones; for example, the overweight type is constitutionally
overweight from an early age and not someone who becomes
overweight through overeating and lack of exercise.
The classification of the body type according to body build is as
follows:
 
• 
 
robust type
• 
 
compact type
• 
 
muscular type
• 
 
thin type
• 
 
overweight type.
Robust Type
Observation
People of the robust type have large, firm muscles, smooth moist
skin, a large abdomen, intolerance to heat and a preference for
cold. 
Figure 1.15
 
shows a robust body type.
179
FIG. 1.15
 
Robust body type
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned physical features indicate that the person
has a constitutional abundance of Yang-Qi. Such a person has
strong resistance to cold. These people will have a tendency to
diseases of Hot nature.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 59
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: 
“Robust people are rich in
Qi, and abundant Qi will keep the body warm. Therefore, they have
strong resistance to cold.”
 
33
Compact Type
Observation
People of the compact type have the following physical features: a
180
small skeleton, compact solid muscles, thick fat under the skin and
a small but full body build. 
Figure 1.16
 
shows a compact body
type.
FIG. 1.16
 
Compact body type
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned physical features indicate that the person
has a smooth circulation of Qi and Blood, 
but he or she may also
have a tendency to Qi and Blood deficiency. The diseases these
people suffer from are either Cold in nature due to deficiency of
Qi, or are Hot in nature due to deficiency of Blood.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 59
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: 
“
The muscles of compact
type of people are compact and solid, and their skin is full and tight
… People with a compact body build have compact muscles but a
small body … Although people with a compact body build have
some fat, their body build is not big.”
 
34
181
Muscular Type
Observation
The physical features of people of the muscular type are as follows:
large skeleton, plump and solid body build with the skin and
muscles compacted tightly together. 
Figure 1.17
 
shows a muscular
body type.
FIG. 1.17
 
Muscular body type
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned physical features indicate that the person
has abundant Blood and harmonious Qi. Such a person will not be
easily invaded by pathogenic factors.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 59
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: 
“People of the muscular
type have skin and muscles tightly compacted together … big,
broad body size … and large limbs”
 
and also: 
“People of the
182
muscular type have abundant Qi, their body build is full and strong
and their Qi is harmonious.”
 
35
Thin Type
Observation
People of the thin type have the following physical features: thin
body build, thin muscles and lips and a feeble voice. 
Figure 1.18
shows a thin body type.
FIG. 1.18
 
Thin body type
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned physical features indicate that the person’s
Qi and Blood circulate smoothly. Thin, pale people have a tendency
to deficiency of Qi and Blood. In treatment, attention should be
paid to tonifying and caution should be exercised when
eliminating pathogenic factors. Thin people with a relatively dark
complexion tend to suffer from Yin deficiency and possibly Empty-
Heat. In herbal treatment, warm and drying herbs (which have a
183
tendency to injure Yin) should be used with caution.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 38
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: 
“Thin type of people have
thin pale skin as well as thin muscles and lips. They talk in a feeble
voice. Their Blood is clear, and their Qi is smooth and slippery.
Their Qi will dissipate easily, and their Blood will exhaust easily.
Therefore, when needling these people, insertion should be
superficial and the needles should be withdrawn quickly.”
 
36
Overweight Type
Observation
The overweight body type has loose skin and muscles, fat
abdomen and thighs, moves slowly and often becomes breathless
on walking.
Clinical significance
The overweight body type indicates either an actual condition of
Damp-Phlegm with Qi deficiency or a predisposition to it. 
Figure
1.19
 
shows an overweight type.
184
FIG. 1.19
 
Overweight body type
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE
ACCORDING TO PAIN AND DRUG
TOLERANCE
The body shapes indicating high or low tolerance to drugs and
pain may be either constitutional or the result of postnatal
influences.
The body shape may be classified according to drug and pain
tolerance as follows:
 
• 
 
body shape indicating high pain and drug tolerance
• 
 
body shape indicating low pain and drug tolerance.
Body Shape Indicating High Pain And Drug
Tolerance
Observation
People with a high drug (including herbs) and pain tolerance have
185
certain physical features: the complexion is relatively dark, the
body build is big and full with a strong skeleton, the tendons are
soft, the muscles are loose and the skin firm.
Clinical significance
The above-mentioned physical features indicate that the person
has strong drug and pain tolerance. When treating such a patient,
the practitioner should be aware of the strong drug and pain
tolerance and consider using medicines in relatively large doses.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 53
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says:
The Yellow Emperor asks Shao Yu: “People’s tendons and bones
can be strong or weak, the muscles can be solid or loose, the
skin can be thick or thin, the space between skin and muscles
can be firm or weak, how does this affect people’s tolerance of
pain caused by needling and the burning of the moxa? People’s
stomach and intestines can be strong or weak, how does this
affect their tolerance of medicinal drugs? I hope that you will
explain this to me in detail.” Shao Yu answers: “People with
strong bones, soft tendons, relaxed muscles and thick skin, have
a strong tolerance to pain. They can tolerate pain caused by
needling as well as the burning of moxa.” The Yellow Emperor
asks: “How can you know that people can tolerate the burning
pain of moxibustion?” Shao Yu answers: “In the above-
mentioned people who have strong bones, soft tendons, relaxed
muscles and thick skin, if their complexion colour is relatively
dark and their skeleton is well-built and strong, they can
tolerate the burning pain of moxibustion. People with a thick
stomach, dark complexion colour, solid skeleton and a large
body build have sufficient Qi and Blood. They have a good
tolerance to medicinal drugs.”
 
37
Chapter 50
 
of the same book says:
186
The Yellow Emperor says: “The tolerance of pain does not
depend only on the courage of a person. A person who is brave
but intolerant of pain, will act without fear in a difficult and
dangerous situation, but he or she cannot stand pain. Vice
versa, a person who is cowardly but tolerant of pain, will be
panic-stricken in a difficult and dangerous situation, but he or
she will tolerate pain. A person who is brave and also tolerant
of pain is not afraid in a difficult and dangerous situation and
can also tolerate pain. A person who is timid and intolerant of
pain will be overwhelmed by difficulties, danger or pain: these
people will be so afraid that their heads spin and their vision is
blurred; they lose their voices and become pale; they cannot
look people in the eye and their hearts beat violently. They are
scared to death. I have encountered all these kinds of people,
but I do not know what the causes are. I would like to know
the reasons.” Shao Yu answers: “Tolerance to pain depends on
whether the skin is thin or thick and the muscles are solid or
weak and loose or tense. It cannot be determined by the
bravery or cowardice of a person.”
 
38
Chapter 70
 
of the “Simple Questions” says: “
 
For people who
have strong drug tolerance, use medicines with strong flavours and
medicinal action. For people who have weak drug tolerance, use
medicines of mild flavour and medicinal action
 
.”
 
39
Body Shape Indicating Low Pain And Drug
Tolerance
Observation
The body shape indicating a low tolerance of pain and drugs is as
follows: a thin body, solid muscles and thin, tender, loose skin.
Clinical significance
The above physical features indicate that the person has a
relatively lower tolerance to pain and medicinal drugs. Such a
patient tends to complain more about the illness and does not
187
tolerate Chinese herbal medicines well: we should therefore use
lower doses when treating these patients.
Quotations from the classics
Chapter 53
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: “
 
People with solid muscles
and thin skin are intolerant of pain caused by needling and of the
burning pain of moxibustion … People who are thin with a weak
Stomach cannot tolerate the strong irritation of medicinal herbs
 
.”
40
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:138 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
Bin, Zhang Jie. Classic of Categories (
Lei Jing
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing House, 1982; 99. [First
published in 1624].
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:129 First published c.
100
BC
4. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 130.
5. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 123.
6. 
Qian, Wu. Golden Mirror of Medicine (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1977; 889.
[vol. 2, First published in 1742].
7. 
Cited in Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang
Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan: Shanxi Science
Publishing House, 1995; 44.
8. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 130
9. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 130
10. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 129
11. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 130
12. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 115
188
13. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 115
14. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, p. 885
15. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 115
16. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 115
17. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, p. 885
18. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 115
19. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, p. 886
20. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 116
21. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 116
22. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, p. 886
23. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 116
24. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, pp. 886–887
25. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 78
26. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 102
27. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 19
28. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, p. 871
29. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 78
30. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 103
31. 
Yue, Zhang Jing. The Complete Works of Jing Yue (
Jing Yue
Quan Shu
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and
Technology Press, 1986; 19. [First published in 1624].
32. 
Yue, Zhang Jing. The Complete Works of Jing Yue (
Jing Yue
Quan Shu
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and
Technology Press, 1986; 19.
33. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 108
34. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 108
35. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 108
36. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 79
37. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 102
38. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 99
39. 
Simple Questions, p. 456.
40. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 102
189
CHAPTER 2
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE MIND,
SPIRIT AND
EMOTIONS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE THREE ASPECTS OF THE SPIRIT
The embodiment of the Spirit
The vitality of the Spirit
The lustre of the Spirit
THE THREE CONDITIONS OF THE SPIRIT
Strong Spirit
Weak Spirit
False Spirit
THE SPIRIT AND CONSTITUTION
190
Strong Spirit and strong constitution
Weak Spirit and weak constitution
Weak Spirit and strong constitution
Strong Spirit and weak constitution
THE SPIRIT AND THE EMOTIONS
Eyes
Complexion
Tongue
INTRODUCTION
The Chinese character “
Shen
 
” has many different meanings in
Chinese medicine, the main ones being, of course, Mind and
Spirit. It should be remembered here that I translate as “Mind”
the “
Shen
 
” pertaining to and residing in the Heart, while I
translate as, “Spirit” the total of the Five Spiritual Aspects, i.e. the
Ethereal Soul (
Hun
 
) residing in the Liver, the Corporeal Soul (
Po
 
)
residing in the Lungs, the Intellect (
Yi
 
) residing in the Spleen, the
Will-Power (
Zhi
 
) residing in the Kidneys and the Mind (
Shen
 
)
itself residing in the Heart.
 
!
Remember
 
: I translate the 
Shen
 
of the Heart as “Mind”
and the complex of 
Hun, Po, Yi, Zhi
 
and 
Shen
 
itself as
“Spirit”.
The Mind and Spirit are formed from the Prenatal Essences of
the parents and are nourished by the Postnatal Essence of food
and water taken in by the body. For example, 
Chapter 32
 
of the
“Spiritual Axis” says: 
“The Mind and Spirit result from the
transformation of the Essence of food and water.”
 
1
Chapter 9
 
of the “Simple Questions” says:
191
Heaven provides human beings with the five Qi [air] and Earth
provides human beings with the five flavours [food]. The air is
absorbed through the nose, and is stored in the Lungs and
Heart. It ascends to make the complexion bright and lustrous
and the voice sonorous. The food is taken through the mouth,
and is stored in the Stomach and Intestines. After the food is
digested and absorbed, the food Essence is delivered to the five
Yin organs and therefore nourishes the Qi of the five Yin organs.
When the Qi of the five Yin organs is in a state of harmony, the
body can transform properly, body fluids are produced
normally and the Mind and Spirit are formed.
 
2
The Essence, Qi and Blood are the material foundation of the
Mind and Spirit and, conversely, the Mind and Spirit are the
external manifestation of Essence, Qi and Blood. 
Chapter 18
 
of the
“Spiritual Axis” says: “
 
The Stomach is in the Middle Burner, it
opens into the Upper Burner, it receives Qi, excretes the dregs,
evaporates the fluids, transforming them into a refined essence. This
pours upwards towards the Lungs and is transformed into Blood …
Blood is the foundation of the Mind and Spirit.
 
”
 
3
 
All the above
quotations highlight the relation between the Essence, Qi, Blood
and the Mind/Spirit.
The “Great Dictionary of Chinese Medicine” says: “
 
Human life
originates from the Essence. It is maintained by Qi and manifested
through the Mind and Spirit. Qi, Blood and Essence are the material
foundation of the Mind and Spirit. Therefore, when Qi, Blood and
Essence are sufficient, the Mind and Spirit are healthy. If there is
deficiency of Qi, Blood and Essence, the Mind and Spirit suffer.
 
”
 
4
Our physical features reflect the state of the Mind and Spirit and
therefore the state of the Mind and Spirit can be gauged through
the observation of the physical features.
As we know, Qi is a subtle life force which is manifested
simultaneously in the body in all its physiological activities and in
the Mind and Spirit in its emotional and thinking activities (
Fig.
2.1
 
). For example, the pathological condition of Liver-Qi
stagnation manifests with physical signs such as abdominal
distension and simultaneously with emotional signs such as
192
depression or mood swings.
FIG. 2.1
 
Relationship between the body and the Mind and Spirit in
Chinese medicine
Therefore, the Mind, Spirit and emotions reflect the state of the
internal organs and of Qi, Blood and Essence and, vice versa, the
state of Qi, Blood and Essence influences the Mind, Spirit and
emotions. Observation of physical features such as the lustre of
the complexion and hair, the vitality of the eyes, the tone of voice,
the body movement, the pulse, the tongue, etc., help us to assess
the state of the Mind, the vitality of the Spirit and the emotional
state.
THE THREE ASPECTS OF THE SPIRIT
When observing and assessing the Spirit of a person, we should
examine three separate aspects:
 
• 
 
the embodiment of the Spirit
• 
 
the vitality of the Spirit
• 
 
the lustre of the Spirit.
The Embodiment Of The Spirit
Observation
The embodiment of the Spirit represents the outward physical
manifestation of the Spirit in the body. If the embodiment of the
193
Spirit is strong, a person will have good energy, a strong and solid
body build, well-developed muscles, eyes with lustre and a lively
expression, agile movements and keen reflexes. The whole body
appears to be full of life. If the Spirit is weak, a person will have a
weak or emaciated body, lack of energy, eyes without lustre, a dull
complexion, slow movements, unsteady walk and slow reflexes.
The whole body seems to lack vitality. In severe cases, there will
also be mental confusion or lethargy, wasting muscles and a weak
body with dull skin.
Clinical significance
The embodiment of the Spirit is the reflection of the Spirit in the
body. If the embodiment of the Spirit is strong, it means that Yin,
Yang, Qi and Blood are still abundant, pathogenic factors are not
so strong, and there is no severe impairment of the internal organs
yet. If the embodiment of the Spirit is weak, it shows that
pathogenic factors are strong, Upright Qi is exhausted and the
internal organs are depleted.
The Vitality Of The Spirit
Observation
The vitality of the Spirit is its manifestation in the general vitality
of a person: the “energy” radiated by people which reflects their
Spirit. Observation of the 
vitality of the Spirit is an integral part of
the observation of the Spirit. If the vitality of the Spirit is vibrant,
then a person will have a clear mind, high energy, a strong voice,
regular breathing, clear thinking and quick reflexes. If the vitality
of the Spirit is dull, a person will have low energy, a weak voice,
dull expression, lethargy, apathy and, in severe cases, mental
confusion.
Clinical significance
The vitality of the Spirit reflects the state of the Mind and Spirit
and the relative strength of Qi and Blood of the internal organs
and that of pathogenic factors. If the vitality of the Spirit of a
person is vibrant, Qi and Blood are abundant, the internal organs
194
are strong, pathogenic factors are weak and the disease is mild. If
the vitality of the Spirit is dull, it indicates that Qi and Blood are
deficient, the internal organs weak, pathogenic factors strong and
the disease severe.
The chapter “Key to the Four Diagnostic Methods” of “The
Golden Mirror of Medicine” says: “
 
In the beginning of a disease,
the state of the Spirit is important. The reason is that if the Spirit is
strong at the beginning of a disease, it means that pathogenic
factors cannot defeat the Upright Qi, as it is still strong. If the
Spirit is dull, it shows that the Upright Qi cannot resist pathogenic
factors as it is deficient
 
.”
 
5
The Lustre Of The Spirit
Observation
The lustre of the Spirit refers to the lustre of the complexion, hair
and eyes; the Spirit is reflected in their lustre and observation of
them is an essential part of the observation of the Spirit. If the
lustre of the Spirit is bright, a person will have a normal, glowing
complexion, clear sparkling eyes, shining hair, a lively expression
and lustrous, supple skin. If the lustre of the Spirit is dull, a
person will have a haggard complexion, withered, lifeless hair, dull
eyes and a listless expression and dry, withered skin.
The chapter “On compulsory observation of the Spirit while
observing a disease” in the book “Origin of Medicine” (
Yi Yuan
 
,
1861) says:
No matter what the colour is, there should be lustre (shen). In
lustre, one can differentiate light and body. “Light” refers to a
bright appearance on the surface, while “body” refers to the
moisture below the surface of the skin. Light has no form and
reflects Yang and Qi. Body has a form and reflects Yin and
Blood. If there is no abnormality of Qi and Blood, and Yin and
Yang are in harmony, the lustre will have normal light and
body.
 
6
Clinical significance
195
The lustre of the Spirit reflects the state of the Internal Organs and
the strength of Qi and Blood. If the lustre of the Spirit is rich, it
indicates that the Internal Organs are functioning normally and Qi
and Blood are abundant. When diseases occur, they are mild and
the prognosis is good. If the lustre of the Spirit is lacking, this
denotes that Qi and Blood are deficient, the Internal Organs are
weak, pathogenic factors are strong and the prognosis is poor.
Box 2.1
 
summarizes the three aspects of the Spirit.
 
BOX 2.1
 
   
 
THE THREE ASPECTS OF THE
SPIRIT
• 
 
The “
embodiment
 
” of the Spirit is the outward
manifestation of the Spirit in the body itself
• 
 
The “
vitality
 
” of the Spirit is the outward
manifestation of the Spirit as it is reflected in the
“energy” of the person
• 
 
The “
lustre
 
” of the Spirit is the outward
manifestation of the Spirit as it is reflected in the lustre
of the eyes and complexion
THE THREE CONDITIONS OF THE
SPIRIT
When examining the state of the Mind and Spirit, there are three
basic conditions:
 
• 
 
strong Spirit
• 
 
weak Spirit
• 
 
false Spirit.
Strong Spirit
Observation
The signs of a strong Spirit are: sparkling, clear eyes, a lively
196
expression, a lustrous complexion, a clear and alert mind, keen
reflexes, good energy, enthusiasm, normal breathing, a clear,
ringing voice and agile body movements. This person will have
high spirits, a positive approach to life, a stable personality, strong
will-power, a clear sense of direction in life and a keen intellect.
Clinical significance
The above signs indicate that the person has a strong and healthy
Mind and Spirit and, whatever problem that person might
develop, the prognosis is good. The presence of a strong Spirit also
means that that person will not suffer from emotional problems
or, if these occur, will not be overwhelmed by them.
Weak Spirit
Observation
The signs of a weak Spirit are listlessness, lack of enthusiasm, dull
eyes without sparkle, complexion without lustre, shallow
breathing, a weak voice, slow body movements, confused thinking,
tongue without “spirit” (
Shen
 
), and possibly with a Heart crack,
and a pulse without a wave. Such people will suffer from apathy,
depression, lack of will-power, confusion about their path in life
and a slow intellect.
Chapter 17
 
of the “Simple Questions” describes the
manifestation of a weak Spirit by observation of the head and eyes:
“
 
The five Yin organs house the Spirit; they are essential for the body
to be strong. The head is the residence of the Spirit: if the head
droops and the eyes are deep-socketed and dull, it means that the
Spirit is exhausted.
 
”
 
7
The chapter “Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods” of “The
Golden Mirror of Medicine” also discusses the manifestations of
lack of Spirit by observing the eyes, speech and mental condition
of the patient and it says:
The Spirit is housed in the Heart. It is not substantial or visible
but it manifests in the eyes. If the eyes look dull, it means that
the Spirit is exhausted: it indicates a poor prognosis. If the eyes
are bright and clear, it denotes that the Spirit is vital and the
197
body is free of disease … If there is delirium and incoherent
speech, it indicates that the Spirit is gone.
 
8
Clinical significance
When the Spirit is weak all the organs are affected, the Essence
and Qi suffer and, whatever disease the person might have, the
prognosis is less good than in a person with a strong Spirit. A weak
Spirit also means that that person is more prone to emotional
problems or will be more easily overwhelmed by them.
False Spirit
The condition of “False Spirit” usually appears only during the
course of a severe, chronic disease. This occurs when a severely ill
patient suddenly appears revitalized and in high spirits: this is
called “False Spirit” and it is usually a poor prognostic sign. The
key factor in determining that this is a false appearance of the
Spirit is the suddenness of the improvement; however, if the Spirit
of a chronically ill patient improves slowly and gradually over
several days, that is a good sign.
Observation
The typical manifestations of the False Spirit appear in the course
of a severe chronic disease and they are as follows: the patient
suddenly seems to be vigorous with a clear look in the eyes, talks
incessantly and wants to meet family members, the appetite
improves suddenly and the complexion suddenly becomes bright
red almost as if the patient were wearing make-up. There is a
precise description of the False Spirit in the book “Chinese
Medicine Diagnosis”:
The False Spirit indicates the momentary improvement in
energy of a patient during a severe, chronic disease: it is not a
good sign but an omen of death. The manifestations of the False
Spirit are as follows: in a patient suffering from a severe,
chronic disease and previously suffering from a weak Spirit,
suddenly the energy seems better, the eyes become bright, the
198
patient suddenly talks a lot and wants to meet family
members, the voice, previously feeble, suddenly becomes clear
and loud, the complexion, previously dark, suddenly becomes
bright red and the appetite suddenly comes back. These
manifestations are due to the extreme exhaustion of the Essence
and Qi. In such a circumstance, Yin fails to restrain Yang so
that Yang floats outwards and upwards, causing the false
appearance of an improvement. In ancient times, people
compared it to the last flicker of a fading oil lamp or the last
radiance of the setting sun. It is a dangerous sign indicating the
separation of Yin and Yang.
 
9
Clinical significance
If the manifestations of the False Spirit appear, it means that the
Upright Qi is collapsing, and Yin and Yang are about to separate.
Such patients often die within a short time.
THE SPIRIT AND CONSTITUTION
When observing the mental and emotional state of a person, it is
important first of all to assess the relative strength of the Spirit
compared with that of the constitution, 
both the prenatal and
postnatal as described above. The Spirit and the constitution are
both reflections of the Essence and Qi of the body, the former in
the mental—spiritual sphere and the latter in the physical sphere.
Because of the close connection between the Spirit and the
constitution of a person, generally a strong pre- and postnatal
constitution is accompanied by a strong Spirit; conversely, a weak
pre- and postnatal constitution is generally accompanied by a
weak Spirit. However, there may be cases when there is a
divergence between these two aspects, that is, the person has a
strong pre- and postnatal constitution but a weak Spirit, or vice
versa.
An assessment of the relative strength of the two is helpful in
forming a prognosis, which will be discussed below. There are four
possible situations:
 
• 
 
strong Spirit and strong constitution
199
• 
 
weak Spirit and weak constitution
• 
 
weak Spirit and strong constitution
• 
 
strong Spirit and weak constitution.
Strong Spirit And Strong Constitution
Observation
A person with a strong Spirit and strong constitution will have
solid muscles, a lustrous normal complexion, a vigorous
expression in shining eyes, a strong body, lustrous hair, agile
movement and keen reflexes; on a mental—spiritual level, this
person will have high spirits, a positive approach to life, a stable
personality, strong will-power, a clear sense of direction in their life
and a keen intellect.
Clinical significance
The above physical and mental characteristics indicate both a good
constitution and a strong Spirit; the internal organs of such a
person are strong and function normally, Qi and Blood are
abundant and the Mind and Spirit are healthy. The body will not
be easily invaded by pathogenic factors. Even if diseases occur,
they can be easily cured. 
Chapter 19
 
of the “Simple Questions”
says: “
 
If the Upright Qi and the body build of a patient are both
strong, any disease will be easy to treat. If the complexion is
lustrous and bright, the patient will recover soon.”
 
10
 
Chapter 20
 
of
the same book says: “If the body build and the Upright Qi are both
strong, the patient will survive
 
.”
 
11
Weak Spirit And Weak Constitution
Observation
A person with a weak Spirit and a weak constitution will be listless
with an emaciated body build, a haggard complexion, dull eyes,
withered hair and a feeble voice; from a mental—emotional point
of view, such people will suffer from apathy, depression, lack of
200
will-power, a confusion about their path in life and a slow intellect.
Clinical significance
The above characteristics indicate that the patient has both a weak
Spirit and a weak constitution and there will be a deficiency of Yin,
Yang, Qi or Blood. Any illness that such a person suffers from will
tend to be long lasting and chronic and the body will be easily
invaded by external pathogenic factors. The weak Spirit will also
hamper an improvement in the physical condition. A simultaneous
weakness of both the Spirit and the constitution generally
indicates a poor prognosis.
Weak Spirit And Strong Constitution
Observation
A person with a weak Spirit and a strong constitution will have
solid muscles, a strong body, lustrous hair, agile movement and
keen reflexes, large bones, a brisk walk, but dull eyes without
sparkle, a haggard complexion without lustre and a weak voice.
From a mental—emotional point of view, such people will tend to
suffer from apathy, depression, lack of will-power, a confusion
about their path in life and a slow intellect.
Clinical significance
The combination of a weak Spirit and a strong constitution is
usually seen in patients who are born with a strong prenatal
constitution but whose Mind and Spirit are affected by life events.
Although the treatment of such patients is more difficult than it
would be if they had a strong Spirit, their strong constitution
means that the prognosis is still relatively good and that the Mind
and Spirit can recover their balance.
Chapter 19
 
of the “Simple Questions” says: “
 
If the body build is
strong and the Upright Qi and Mind weak, the disease is difficult to
treat. If the complexion is dark without lustre, the disease is
difficult to cure
 
.”
 
12
Strong Spirit And Weak Constitution
201
Observation
A person with a strong Spirit and a weak constitution will suffer
from chronic diseases and will have an emaciated body build,
listlessness, a haggard complexion, dull eyes, withered hair, a
feeble voice, coarse breath but a clear, loud voice and eyes with
lustre; from the mental—emotional point of view, such patients
will have high spirits, a positive approach to life, a stable
personality, strong will-power, a clear sense of direction in their life
and a keen intellect.
Clinical significance
The combination of a weak constitution and a strong Spirit may
seem contrary to the fundamental tenet of Chinese medicine that
sees the body and the Mind as an integrated whole; in fact, in
general, a weak pre- and postnatal constitution will be
accompanied by a weak Spirit. However, there are exceptions to
this as some people seem to be able to maintain a strong Spirit
despite a poor constitution.
The prognosis in this case is better than in the previous case
because the strong Spirit, helped by treatment, is able to harness
the healing powers of the body.
THE SPIRIT AND THE EMOTIONS
The emotional state of the patient is gauged primarily from
observation of the eyes, the complexion and the tongue. The
observation of these features must of course be closely integrated
with the interrogation, listening to the voice and palpation of the
pulse.
Eyes
Observation of the eyes to gauge the emotional state of the patient
is based primarily on observation of the lustre and control of the
eyes.
Lustre
 
of the eyes refers to the brilliance, sparkle, glitter and
vitality of the normal eye. Eyes with lustre indicate a normal state
202
of the Mind and Spirit and, generally speaking, the absence of
serious emotional problems. Eyes without lustre are dull, lack
vitality and sparkle and look as if they were covered by a mist; this
always indicates emotional problems of some nature. The extent to
which the eyes lack lustre is directly related to the duration and
intensity of the emotional problems: the duller the eyes, the
deeper and more long standing are the emotional problems.
Control
 
of the eyes refers to the gaze and movement of the eyes.
If a person is able to fix the gaze and the eyes do not move but
neither are they too fixed, the eyes have “control”. If a person has a
shifty gaze, if the eyes move too much or if they are fixed in a stare,
they are “uncontrolled”. Eyes without control indicate a relatively
serious disturbance of the Mind and Spirit.
Complexion
A complexion with lustre is bright, moist and shining, while a
lustreless complexion is dark, dull and somewhat dry. It is
important to note that the lustre of the complexion is a diagnostic
feature separate from the colour of the complexion; e.g. an
abnormal yellow complexion could be with or without lustre.
A complexion with lustre indicates that the Mind and Spirit are
relatively unaffected by emotional problems whereas a complexion
without lustre indicates the presence of emotional problems.
Similarly as for the eyes, the lack of lustre of a complexion is
directly related to the intensity and duration of emotional
problems: the duller the complexion, the deeper and more long
standing the emotional problems.
Tongue
One of the main features to look for in the tongue to determine
whether the patient is affected by emotional problems or not, is
the presence of absence of a Heart crack (see 
Fig. 25.8
 
, 
p. 217
 
).
A Heart crack on the tongue is relatively narrow and it extends
throughout the whole length of the tongue to the border of the tip.
Such a crack indicates the tendency to emotional problems; the
deeper the crack, the more intense the emotional problems.
A second pathological sign to look for on the tongue in
203
emotional problems is a Red tip. Emotional stress generally leads
to Qi stagnation and with time this leads to some Heat. As all
emotions affect the Heart, emotional stress frequently manifests
with a Red tip of the tongue, which reflects a certain degree of
Heart-Heat. The redder the tip the more intense are the emotional
problems, and a swelling and red points on the tip indicate an
even more severe emotional problem.
The observation of these three features, eyes, complexion and
tongue, should be closely integrated and each sign should be
checked against the other two to give us 
an idea of the intensity
and duration of the emotional problems.
In terms of time scale, when a person is subject to emotional
stress, the lustre of the eyes will be the first of these three to
change, the complexion the second and the tongue the last
(although this is just a general rule and there may be variations in
practice). Therefore, for example, if the eyes lack lustre but the
complexion has lustre and the tip of the tongue is not Red, this
indicates that the emotional problems are of a relatively short
duration; if, on the contrary, the eyes and complexion lack lustre
and the tongue has a Red tip and a deep Heart crack, this indicates
that the emotional problems suffered by the patient are very deep
and long standing.
As indicated above, when diagnosing the emotional state of the
patient, interrogation and observation must also be integrated
with palpation of the pulse. In terms of time scale, the pulse will
actually be the first to change. To summarize, therefore, the time
scale of the changes observed in emotional problems is as follows:
 
• 
 
pulse
• 
 
eyes
• 
 
complexion
• 
 
tongue.
The observation of the lustre of the eyes is discussed also in
Chapter 6
 
, while that of the complexion is discussed in 
Chapter 3
 
.
204
NOTES
1. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:72 First published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:67 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 52
4. 
Cited in Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
 
). Taiyuan:
Shanxi Science Publishing House, 1995; 65.
5. 
Cited in Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
 
). Taiyuan:
Shanxi Science Publishing House, 1995; 69.
6. 
Cited in Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
 
). Taiyuan:
Shanxi Science Publishing House, 1995; 69.
7. 
Simple Questions, p. 100.
8. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 71
9. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 72
10. 
Simple Questions, p. 128.
11. 
Simple Questions, p. 136.
12. 
Simple Questions, p. 128.
205
CHAPTER 3
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE
COMPLEXION
COLOUR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
DOMINANT AND GUEST COLOURS
Dominant colours
Guest colours
Clinical significance
OBSERVATION OF DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF COMPLEXION
COLOUR
Superficial or deep colour
Distinct or obscure colour
Scattered or concentrated colour
Thin or thick colour
206
Lustrous or lustreless colour
Conforming or opposing colours
Prognosis according to complexion colour
Changes in complexion colour during a disease
Complexion colours and emotions
COMPLEXION COLOURS
Normal complexion colour
White complexion colour
Sallow complexion colour
Yellow complexion colour
Red complexion colour
Bluish/greenish complexion colour
Dark complexion colour
Purple complexion colour
INTRODUCTION
The colour and lustre of the complexion are the outward
manifestations of the internal organs and of Yin, Yang, Qi and
Blood. If the internal organs function normally and if Yin, Yang, Qi
and Blood are abundant and balanced, the complexion will have
normal colour and proper lustre; conversely, when Qi, Blood, Yin
and Yang are weakened and the internal organs affected, the
complexion acquires an abnormal colour.
The chapter ‘On observation of the colour’ in ‘Principle and
Prohibition for the Medical Profession’ (
Yi Men Fa Lu
 
) says: ‘
 
When
the five Yin organs are
 
exhausted, the complexion colour becomes
dark and lustreless … So the complexion colour is like a flag of
the Spirit, and the Yin organs are the residences of the Spirit.
When the Spirit is gone, the Yin organs are worn out, and the
207
complexion colour becomes dark and lustreless.’
 
1
 
As the above
passage indicates clearly, observation of complexion colour is a
very important diagnostic tool to assess the condition not only of
Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang and of the internal organs, but also of the
Mind and Spirit. Indeed from a Five-Element perspective, the
facial complexion as a whole is a manifestation of the Heart and
therefore the Mind and Spirit; this should never be forgotten in
practice. Thus, if a woman has a very dull, sallow complexion it
does indicate a Spleen-Qi deficiency and Dampness and possibly
also Blood deficiency, but, at the same time, it also indicates that
the Mind and Spirit are affected and suffering.
Yu Chang in ‘Principles of Medical Practice’ (1658) calls the
complexion the ‘banner of the Mind and Spirit’ and he says: 
‘When
the Mind and Spirit are flourishing, the complexion is glowing;
when the Mind and Spirit are declining, the complexion withers.
When the Mind is stable the complexion is florid …’.
 
2
The normal complexion should have ‘lustre’ and ‘moisture’.
‘Lustre’ means that the complexion colour should be bright,
glowing and with a shine to it; ‘moisture’ means that the
complexion should look moist and the skin firm, indicating that
there is moisture underneath it. There is a correspondence
between these two aspects of the complexion and two of the
attributes of the normal pulse: the lustre of the complexion
corresponds to the spirit of the pulse, whereas the moisture of the
complexion corresponds to Stomach-Qi of the pulse. Thus, we can
say that if the complexion has lustre there is spirit; if it has
moisture there is Stomach-Qi.
Observation of the complexion must be closely linked to the
feeling of the pulse. The pulse shows the state of Qi, the
complexion the state of the Mind and Spirit. If the pulse shows
changes but the complexion is normal, this indicates that the
problem is recent. If both the pulse and the complexion show
pathological changes, this indicates that the problem is long
standing.
The lustre of the complexion should also be checked against the
lustre of the eyes. A change in the complexion always indicates a
deeper or more long-standing problem. For example, a sustained
period of overwork and inadequate sleep may cause the eyes to
208
lack lustre (and the pulse to be Weak); if the complexion has not
changed, this is not too serious and the person can recover easily
by resting. If, however, the eyes lack lustre and the complexion is
dull, without lustre, or dark, it indicates that the problem is not
transient but deeper rooted.
Thus, in terms of time scale, the pulse changes first, the eyes
second and the complexion last. Accordingly, if the pulse is
affected but the eyes and the complexion are not, the problem is
very recent; if pulse and eyes are affected (lacking in lustre), the
problem is older (some months); if the pulse, eyes and complexion
are all affected, the problem is even older (over 1 year).
DOMINANT AND GUEST COLOURS
Dominant Colours
The normal complexion colour varies, of course, according to racial
group but also according to Elemental types as described in
Chapter 1
 
. Wood types have a subtle greenish hue to their
complexion, Earth types a subtle yellowish hue, Fire types a red
hue, Metal types a white hue, and Water types a dark hue.
Therefore, the normal complexion colour is determined by race
and prenatal influences and, in health, remains the same
throughout life. In disease, the complexion colour becomes
pathological and will vary, obviously according to the racial group,
but also according to Element type; for example, a pathological
yellow colour in someone of the Wood type will be subtly different
from that in someone of the Fire type. Such differences in
pathological colours are, of course, even more evident in different
racial groups; for example, the paleness of a Caucasian patient will
differ from that of an Asian patient.
The basic inherited complexion colours, determined by race and
Elemental type, are called ‘dominant colours’. The chapter ‘Keys to
the Four Diagnostic Methods’ in the ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’
(
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
) says: 
‘
The colours of the five Yin organs manifest
in people according to their body shape based on the Five Elements.
Such colours never change throughout life. They are known as
dominant colours
 
.’
 
3
209
In addition, there are other factors related to environment and
season which influence the complexion colour. Environmental
conditions and lifestyle have an important influence on
complexion colour so that what is a normal complexion colour for
one person may not be so for another, even within the same racial
group and Element type; this should be taken into account when
diagnosing patients. For example, the normal complexion of a
farmer who spends most of his life outdoors will obviously be
different from that of an office worker: inevitably, the farmer’s
‘normal’ complexion will be redder than the office worker’s.
Chapter 12
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ discusses environmental
influences on the complexion:
The East is where Qi of all kinds of life in nature starts. It is an
area close to seas and water and abounds in fish and salt.
People who live in the East eat a lot of fish, and like salty food.
Therefore they often have a relatively dark complexion and
loose structures between the complexion and muscles. The
South is where all kinds of life in nature grow vigorously, and
where Yang flourishes. It is lower terrain, and has poor water
and soil. There is often fog. People who live in the South like
sour-flavoured and fermented food. Therefore, they often have a
relatively red complexion and dense structures between the
complexion and muscles.
 
4
Obviously, the geographical references in the above passage
refer to China and the dietary references refer to ancient China:
however, the principle that the environment influences the
complexion colour is still valid.
Box 3.1
 
summarizes the dominant colour.
 
BOX 3.1
 
   
 
DOMINANT COLOURS
• 
 
The dominant colour of the complexion is determined
by Element type, race and environmental influences.
Guest Colours
210
‘Guest’ colours are those appearing on the Connecting channels of
the face and limbs. The colours of the Yin Connecting channels
follow those of the Main channels; that is, if the Main channels
manifest with red colour, the Yin Connecting channel will also
manifest with a red colour. The Yang Connecting channels are on
the Yang surfaces and, being more superficial, they are more
readily influenced by seasonal factors. Thus, the complexion may
assume a certain colour owing to the seasonal and climatic
influence on the Yang Connecting channels and such colour may
contradict what one might expect from the Element type or
pathological condition. For example, a patient with a pathological
condition of the Heart (such as Heat) should have a reddish
complexion; if the seasonal and climatic influence (e.g. spring) on
the Yang Connecting channels predominates then the complexion
may instead be greenish. This is called ‘guest’ colour and we
should be able to recognize it in order to explain the anomaly.
Chapter 57
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says:
The Yellow Emperor asks: ‘The Connecting channels are
exposed to the exterior and manifest with five different colours
which are green, yellow, red, white and black. What is the
reason?’ Qi Bo answers, ‘The main channels have their regular
colours, but the colours of the Connecting channels change
according to the four seasons.’ The Yellow Emperor asks, ‘What
are the normal colours of the main channels?’ Qi Bo answers,
‘Red for the Heart, white for the Lungs, green for the Liver,
yellow for the Spleen and black for the Kidneys.’ The Yellow
Emperor asks, ‘Do the colours of the Yin and Yang Connecting
channels correspond to the regular colours of the related main
channels?’ Qi Bo answers, ‘The colours of the Yin Connecting
channels correspond to the regular colours of their related main
channels, while those of the Yang connecting channels change in
accordance with the four seasons. In cold weather, the
circulation of Qi and Blood slows down and there is often a
green or black colour. In warm and hot weather, Qi and Blood
circulation is free and smooth, and there is usually a yellow or
red colour. All these are normal phenomena, indicating the
211
body is in a normal condition.’
 
5
When the above passage talks about the ‘normal colours of the
main channels’, it refers to the five main pathological colours of
the face which are produced by the influence of the main Yin
channels. For example, a pathological condition of the main
channel of the Heart may produce a reddish complexion (of course
this is seen strictly from a Five-Element point of view as, for
example, Heart-Blood deficiency would manifest with a pale rather
than red complexion). The passage then explains that, while the
colour of the Yin Connecting channels accords with the
predominant face colour, that of the Yang Connecting channels is
influenced by the seasons and climate. Bearing in mind that the
limbs are richly supplied by the Yang Connecting channels, one
needs to observe the colour of the limbs as well as the face to
gauge the seasonal influence of these channels. Such colours,
compared with those deriving from racial group and Elemental
type, are temporary and reversible and are known as the ‘guest
colours’, which are not pathological.
It is important to differentiate between ‘guest colours’ due to
environmental and climatic influences and actual abnormal
colours due to pathological conditions.
Clinical Significance
Observation of the complexion colour and lustre helps us to
determine the pathology, location, nature and prognosis of a
disease. When observing the complexion colour, attention should
be paid to distinguishing the dominant colours, the guest colours
and the abnormal colours. It is, of course, necessary to refer to the
pulse, tongue and symptoms and also to take into account the
patient’s Element type.
For example, if someone of the Wood type has a slightly
greenish complexion, this is in keeping with that type; if this
person’s complexion develops a reddish tinge (perhaps a
superficial redness over the underlying greenish colour) during
the summer, this is a ‘guest’ colour and is also normal. However, if
the same person’s complexion is very red and ‘deep’ (see below), it
212
indicates not a ‘guest’ colour but a pathological condition of Heat.
Box 3.2
 
summarizes guest colours.
 
BOX 3.2
 
   
 
GUEST COLOURS
• 
 
The guest complexion colours are influenced by
seasonal and climatic factors.
OBSERVATION OF DIFFERENT
ASPECTS OF COMPLEXION COLOUR
The main aspects of complexion colour to observe are:
 
• 
 
superficial or deep colour
• 
 
distinct or obscure colour
• 
 
scattered or concentrated colour
• 
 
thin or thick colour
• 
 
lustrous or lustreless colour
• 
 
conforming or opposing colour
• 
 
prognosis according to complexion colour
• 
 
changes in complexion colour during a disease
• 
 
complexion colours and emotions.
Superficial Or Deep Colour
Observation
The differentiation between superficial and deep colour is based
on the ‘depth’ of the complexion’s colour. A colour is defined as
‘superficial’ (see 
Plate 3.1 on p. P2
 
) when it is seen clearly on the
surface of the complexion, while it is defined as ‘deep’ when it
appears to be on a level below the surface (see 
Plate 3.2 on p. P3
 
).
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The five colours are
present in certain areas of the face. Recognizing whether the colours
are superficial or deep helps us to understand the shallow or deep
location of the pathogenic factors
 
.’
 
6
 
The chapter ‘Keys to the Four
213
Diagnostic Methods’ in the ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’ (
Yi Zong
Jin Jian
 
) says:
The deep colour is relatively dark. It indicates that diseases are
deep in the Interior. If it is also obscure and lustreless, it
indicates that diseases are chronic and severe. The superficial
colour is relatively light. It indicates that diseases are on the
Exterior. If it is also bright and lustrous, it indicates that
diseases are mild and newly-occurring.’
 
7
The chapter ‘Outline of the Ten Methods for Recognizing Qi’ of
‘
Wang Zhen Zun Jing
 
’ says:
‘The superficial colour is shown on the complexion, while the
deep colour is hidden underneath the complexion. The
superficial colour indicates Exterior diseases, and the deep
colour indicates Interior diseases. If the colour is first
superficial and later becomes deep, it reveals the movement of a
disease from the Exterior to the Interior. If the colour is first
deep and later becomes superficial, it reflects the movement of
the disease from the Interior to the Exterior.’
 
8
Clinical significance
If the abnormal complexion colour is superficial and light, it
indicates that the disease is mild and is located in the Exterior or
in the Yang organs. It can be easily treated, and the prognosis is
good. If the abnormal complexion colour is dark and deep, it
means that the disease is severe and is located deep in the Interior
or in the Yin organs. The treatment is relatively difficult, and the
disease cannot be cured within a short time.
Chapter 15
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says:
If there are changes of the colours in the upper, lower, left and
right regions of the face, efforts should be made to understand
the location and prognosis of the diseases indicated by the
respective colours. If the abnormal colour is light, it implies
that the diseases are mild. Such patients can be treated with
214
soups to nourish the body. They will recover in 10 days. If the
abnormal colour is deep, it indicates that the disease is severe.
Such patients should be treated with a herbal decoction. They
will recover in 21 days. If the abnormal colour is even deeper, it
means that the disease is much more severe. They must be
treated with a herbal tincture to regulate the circulation in the
channels. They will recover in 100 days. If the colour of the
complexion is dark, haggard, vigourless and emaciated, it
shows that the Spirit is gone, the disease cannot be treated and
such patients will die in 100 days.
 
9
Box 3.3
 
summarizes superficial and deep colour.
 
BOX 3.3
 
   
 
SUPERFICIAL OR DEEP
COLOUR
• 
 
Superficial colour: condition mild, Exterior, Yang
• 
 
Deep colour: condition severe, Interior, Yin
Distinct Or Obscure Colour
Observation
The differentiation between a ‘distinct’ or ‘obscure’ colour refers to
the quality of the complexion colour: a distinct colour is bright and
clear and manifests itself readily while an obscure colour is
darkish, dull and lifeless as if ‘trapped’ inside the complexion. It is
important to note that the differentiation between the distinct
colour and the obscure colour of the complexion applies to any
shade of pathological colour and both the distinct and obscure
colours are abnormal; for example, a pathological, dull, yellow
complexion may be either ‘distinct’ or ‘obscure’ (see 
Plates 3.3
 
and
3.4 on p. P3
 
).
The chapter ‘Outline of Ten Methods for Recognizing Qi’ of
‘
Wang Zhen Zun Jing
 
’ says:
The distinct, bright colour looks unfolded and the dark, obscure
colour looks gloomy. The distinct colour indicates that the
215
disease is of the Yang type; the obscure colour indicates that
the disease is of the Yin type. If the distinct colour becomes
obscure, it means that the disease has changed from the Yang to
the Yin type. If the obscure colour becomes distinct, it means
that the disease has changed from the Yin to the Yang type.
 
10
Clinical significance
If an abnormal complexion looks distinct and bright, it indicates
that the disease is of the Yang type, the location of the disease is
superficial and the Upright Qi is not exhausted yet. If an abnormal
complexion colour looks dark and obscure, it indicates that the
disease is of the Yin type, the location of the disease is deep in the
Interior, the Upright Qi is deficient and the disease is severe.
If in the course of a disease the complexion colour changes from
distinct to obscure, it indicates that the disease is progressing
from the Yang to the Yin organs, which is a poor sign. If it changes
from obscure to distinct, it indicates that the disease is
progressing from the Yin to the Yang organs, which is a good sign.
In treatment, for patients with an abnormal but distinct
complexion colour, the emphasis of the treatment should be on
eliminating pathogenic factors. For patients with an abnormal but
obscure complexion colour, equal emphasis should be put on
eliminating pathogenic factors and strengthening the Upright Qi.
Box 3.4
 
summarizes distinct and obscure colours.
 
BOX 3.4
 
   
 
DISTINCT OR OBSCURE
COLOUR
• 
 
Distinct colour: Yang type of disease, superficial,
Upright Qi not exhausted
• 
 
Obscure colour: Yin type of disease, deep, Upright Qi
weakened
Scattered Or Concentrated Colour
Observation
When considering abnormal complexion colours, another
216
differentiation is that between ‘scattered’ and ‘concentrated’. The
scattered colour is thinly distributed and sparse, while the
concentrated colour is densely distributed and aggregated (see
Plates 3.5
 
and 
3.6 on p. P3
 
).
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The observation whether
the colour is scattered or concentrated tells us whether the disease
is a long way off or imminent.
 
’
 
11
The chapter ‘Outline of ten methods for recognizing Qi’ in
‘
Wang Zhen Zun Jing
 
’ gives a different interpretation of the clinical
significance of the scattered or concentrated colours:
The scattered colour is thinly distributed and ‘open’; the
concentrated colour is densely distributed and ‘closed’. The
scattered colour indicates that the disease has had a short
duration, and is about to be alleviated. The concentrated colour
indicates that the disease has had a long duration and will
gradually become severe. If the abnormal colour is
concentrated at first but changes later to being scattered, it
indicates that the disease is about to be alleviated even though
it has had a long duration. If the abnormal colour is scattered
at first but changes later to being concentrated, it indicates
that the disease is becoming severe even though it has had a
short duration.’
 
12
Clinical significance
When an abnormal complexion colour is scattered, this indicates
that the disease is of short duration and mild nature, it will be
treated relatively easily and the prognosis is good. When an
abnormal complexion colour is concentrated, this indicates that
the disease is of long duration and severe, pathogenic factors are
strong, the treatment is relatively difficult and the prognosis is less
good than in the case of a scattered colour.
Box 3.5
 
summarizes scattered and concentrated colour.
 
BOX 3.5
 
   
 
SCATTERED OR
CONCENTRATED COLOUR
• 
 
Scattered colour: mild disease, short duration,
217
pathogenic factors not strong, prognosis good
• 
 
Concentrated colour: severe disease, long duration,
pathogenic factors strong, prognosis not good
Thin Or Thick Colour
Observation
The differentiation between a thin colour and a thick colour is
based on the ‘thickness’ of the colour. To understand this
distinction one could think of paint: 
the thin colour corresponds to
a single skimpy coat of paint while the thick colour corresponds to
several heavy coats of paint (see 
Plates 3.7
 
and 
3.8 on pp. P3 and P4
).
Clinical significance
A thin colour indicates a Deficiency while a thick colour indicates
an Excess, that is, the presence of pathogenic factors. If the colour
changes from thin to thick, it indicates that the condition is
changing from one of Deficiency to one of Excess; if it changes
from thick to thin, it indicates that the condition is changing from
one of Excess to one of Deficiency.
Box 3.6
 
summarizes thin and thick colours.
 
BOX 3.6
 
   
 
THIN OR THICK COLOUR
• 
 
Thin colour: Deficiency
• 
 
Thick colour: Excess
Lustrous Or Lustreless Colour
Observation
A lustrous complexion is bright, moist, vigorous and shining,
while a lustreless complexion is dark, dull, gloomy and ‘withered’.
It is important to note that, in the context of pathology, an
abnormal colour may be lustreless or lustrous. The presence of
218
lustre in the complexion indicates a good prognosis, even if the
colour is abnormal. The brightness of the complexion is a
manifestation of the Spirit, while the lustre derives from the
nourishment of Essence and Blood.
Clinical significance
If an abnormal complexion colour is lustrous, it denotes that the
Spirit is not affected, pathogenic factors are not too strong, the
condition is mild, the treatment relatively easy and the prognosis
good. If an abnormal complexion colour is lustreless, it indicates
that the Spirit has been affected, pathogenic factors are relatively
strong, the Upright Qi is very deficient, the condition is severe, the
treatment relatively difficult and the prognosis poor.
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
Observation of the lustre
or lack of lustre of the complexion colour allows us to judge
whether the prognosis is good or bad.
 
’
 
13
If an abnormal colour of complexion acquires lustre, this
indicates that the condition is improving, Upright Qi is returning,
the Spirit is recovering and the prognosis is good; vice versa, if an
abnormal lustrous colour of the complexion loses its lustre, this
indicates that the Spirit is affected, the condition is worsening,
Upright Qi is weakening and the prognosis is poor.
Box 3.7
 
summarizes lustrous and lustreless colour.
 
BOX 3.7
 
   
 
LUSTROUS OR LUSTRELESS
COLOUR
• 
 
Lustrous colour: Spirit good, pathogenic factors not
strong, condition mild, prognosis good
• 
 
Lustreless colour: Spirit weakened, pathogenic factors
strong, condition severe, prognosis not good
Conforming Or Opposing Colour
Observation
The differentiation between a ‘conforming’ colour and an
‘opposing’ colour is based on two distinct aspects: the first is
219
whether the complexion colour accords with the prevailing
disharmony; the second is whether the complexion colour accords
with the prevailing disharmony according to the Five Elements and
specifically according to the Generating and Overacting cycles.
Conforming or opposing colour according to pattern
According to the first aspect, a ‘conforming’ colour is in
accordance with the condition of the patient; for example the
patient has a Heat pattern and the complexion is red. An
‘opposing’ colour contradicts the patient’s prevailing pattern; for
example the patient has a clear Heat pattern but the complexion is
pale. There can be several different explanations of a contradiction
between the prevailing disharmony and the complexion colour, as
follows:
 
• 
 
The complexion colour may contradict the main
disharmony simply because the patient suffers from
several different patterns and the complexion reflects
one of them. For example, it would not be unusual for a
person to suffer from chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency and
therefore have a dull, pale-yellowish complexion but
also to suffer from Heart-Fire.
• 
 
The complexion colour is influenced by seasonal
influences; thus, a person may have a reddish
complexion in the summer but suffer from chronic
Spleen-Qi deficiency.
• 
 
The complexion colour strongly reflects the state of
the Mind and Spirit and it may occasionally contradict
the prevailing pattern. For example, a person may suffer
from Liver-Fire but if this developed from the
accumulated stagnant Qi deriving from deep emotional
problems such as shock and guilt, the complexion may
not be red but pale-bluish or greenish. In such cases,
the complexion usually shows the deep, underlying
emotional cause of the disharmony.
• 
 
In rare cases, there may be a ‘false’ complexion colour
when there is a total separation of Yin and Yang and the
patient suffers from ‘false Yang’ (red face, very cold
limbs and slow pulse) or from ‘false Yin’ (very pale face,
220
feeling of heat and red tongue).
Conforming or opposing colour according to the Five
Elements
According to the second aspect, the conforming or opposing
complexion colour is also decided on the basis of the Five
Elements and one can distinguish four different situations when
the complexion does not accord with the prevailing Element
pattern. A practical example is the best way of describing these
four possible situations. If a patient suffers from a Liver pattern
but the complexion reflects the colour of the Mother Element (i.e.
Water), this is called ‘conforming colour’; if the complexion
reflects the colour of the Child Element (i.e. Fire) this is called the
‘slightly opposing colour’ (Chinese books refer to it as ‘opposition
within conformity’); if the complexion reflects the colour of the
Element overacted upon (i.e. Earth) this is called ‘opposing colour’
(Chinese books refer to it as ‘conformity within opposition’); if the
complexion reflects the colour of the Element overacting on that of
the prevailing pattern (i.e. Metal) this is called ‘strongly opposing
colour’ (
Table 3.1
 
). The last scenario (i.e. when the complexion
colour belongs to the Element that overacts on the Element of the
prevailing pattern) is the most serious one. For example, if a
patient suffers from a severe Spleen-Qi deficiency (Earth) but the
complexion is green (Wood), this is a bad sign and it means that
the condition will be more difficult to treat.
221
Table 3.1
Conforming and opposing complexion colours according to the
Five Elements
The conforming and opposing colours for diseases of the Five
Elements are illustrated in 
Figures 3.1
 
–
3.5
 
.
FIG. 3.1
 
Conforming and opposing colours in Liver patterns
222
FIG. 3.2
 
Conforming and opposing colours in Heart patterns
FIG. 3.3
 
Conforming and opposing colours in Spleen patterns
223
FIG. 3.4
 
Conforming and opposing colours in Lung patterns
FIG. 3.5
 
Conforming and opposing colours in Kidney patterns
Clinical significance
The differentiation between a conforming or an opposing colour,
whether according to pattern or the Five Elements, helps us to
gauge the severity of the disease, the relative strength of
pathogenic factors and Upright Qi and therefore the prognosis. If
224
the complexion colour conforms with the disease condition, it
indicates that the disease is mild, pathogenic factors are not
strong, Upright Qi is still relatively intact, the treatment will be
relatively easy and the prognosis is good. If the complexion colour
opposes the disease condition, it indicates that the disease is
severe, pathogenic factors are strong, Upright Qi is weak, the
treatment will be relatively difficult and the prognosis is bad.
Of course, the conformity or opposition of the complexion
colour according to the Five Elements is only one of the aspects to
be considered in colour diagnosis. All other factors should be
taken into account and, with regard to complexion in particular,
the presence or absence of lustre overrides the others. In other
words, if the complexion is dark, dull and without lustre, this
indicates a poor prognosis even if the colour is conforming.
Conversely, if the complexion has lustre the prognosis is good even
if the colour is opposing.
Prognosis According To Complexion Colour
Observation
Complexion colour is used to determine prognosis in four ways:
first by determining the presence or absence of lustre, secondly by
paying attention to the ‘thickness’ of the colour, thirdly, by
analysing the ‘conforming’ or ‘rebellious’ nature of the colour
according to its movement between areas of the face, and fourthly
by analysing the complexion colour in its conformity to or
deviation from the seasonal influence. Thus, four aspects will be
discussed:
 
1. 
 
Presence or absence of lustre
2. 
 
Thick or thin colour
3. 
 
Conforming or rebellious colour according to area of
the face
4. 
 
Conformity or deviation of colour according to
season.
1.
 
Presence or absence of lustre
225
If a pathological complexion colour is bright, lustrous and
contained, this is a sign of good prognosis; if it is dark, lustreless
and fully revealed, it indicates poor prognosis. Shi Pa Nan in the
‘Origin of Medicine’ (1861) says: 
‘
The shen of the complexion
consists in lustre and body. Lustre means that the complexion
appears clear and bright from the outside; body means that it is
moist and with lustre in the inside.
 
’
 
14
 
If a complexion has such
attributes, even if the colour is pathological, this indicates that the
Mind and Spirit are stable and unaffected and therefore the
prognosis is good.
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ differentiates between a
good prognosis and a poor prognosis by observation of the five
main pathological colours, comparing them with various objects
that were in common daily use in ancient China (some of which
will be unfamiliar to Westerners). The colours are given in 
Table
3.2
 
.
 
15
Table 3.2
Descriptions of pathological complexion colours in the ‘Simple
Questions’
Pathological colour
Good prognosis
Poor prognosis
Green
feather of a kingfisher
dead grass
Red
rooster comb
stagnant blood
Yellow
abdomen of a crab
bitter orange
White
pig’s fat
dead bone
Dark
crow’s feathers
coal ash
The same chapter also describes the five main healthy
complexion colours, again comparing them with various objects
(
Table 3.3
 
).
 
16
226
Table 3.3
Descriptions of healthy complexion colours in the ‘Simple
Questions’
Organ
Healthy complexion colour
Liver
thin piece of white silk covering a dark purple one
Heart
thin piece of white silk covering cinnabar
Spleen
thin piece of white silk covering snakegourd (
Gua Lou
 
) fruit
Lungs
thin piece of white silk covering a pink one
Kidneys
thin piece of white silk covering a purple one
It is interesting to note that the normal, healthy colours are
described as being covered by a thin piece of white silk, which
means that they should be rather subdued and subtle; it is also
interesting that pathological colours are latent and manifest
themselves when the ‘thin piece of white silk’ is removed.
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ describes the look of
pathological colours with or without lustre in a slightly different
way:
A red complexion should look like vermilion covered with
white, not like ochre. A white complexion should look like
feathers of a goose, not like salt. A blue complexion should look
like moistened greyish jade, not like indigo. A yellow
complexion should look like realgar covered with gauze, not
like loess [the soil in North China along the Yellow River
basin]. A black complexion should look like dark varnish, not
like greyish charcoal.
 
17
Dr Chen Shi Duo in ‘Secret Records of the Stone Room’ (1687)
goes as far as saying: 
‘
If the complexion is dark but with shen, the
person will live even if the disease is serious. If the complexion is
bright but without shen, the person will die even if there is no
disease
 
.’
 
18
If the complexion colour is bright, lustrous and contained, it
indicates that, even though there is a pathological state, the
Internal Organs are not weakened, pathogenic factors are not too
strong, Stomach-Qi is still relatively intact, the disease is mild and
the prognosis is good. If the complexion colour is dark, lustreless
and fully revealed, it shows that the Internal Organs are weakened,
227
pathogenic factors are strong, Stomach-Qi is exhausted, the
disease is severe and the prognosis is poor.
2. Thin or thick colour
The ‘thickness’ of the facial complexion colour is directly related to
the intensity of the pathological condition: a thin and superficial
colour indicates either an exterior disease or a light pathogenic
factor, while a thick and deep colour indicates an interior disease
and a strong pathogenic factor. Therefore a change from a thick to
a thin facial colour indicates that the pathogenic factors are getting
weaker and the disease is retreating; by contrast, a change from a
thin to a thick facial colour indicates that the pathogenic factors
are getting stronger and the disease is advancing.
2.
 
Conforming or rebellious colour according to area of the
face
The conformity or rebellious nature of a colour must also be
related to any movement of the colour from one area of the face to
another.
A movement of a pathological facial colour from the top to the
bottom part of the face indicates an improvement of the condition
and is called ‘conforming’ movement; by contrast, a movement of a
pathological colour from the bottom to the top part of the face
indicates a worsening of the condition and is called ‘rebellious’
movement.
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 15
 
relates the conforming or
rebellious movement of a facial colour (and therefore the
prognosis) also to the left or right side of the face, making a
distinction according to sex: 
‘
In women, [a colour] on the right side
indicates a rebellious [colour], while on the left side it is
conforming. In men, [a colour] on the left side indicates a rebellious
[colour], while on the right side it is conforming.
 
’
 
19
 
This passage
correlates the prognosis to the location of a pathological colour on
the right or left side of the face in men and women: for example, in
a woman, an excessively red colour is always pathological whether
it is on the right or left but it is worse if it is on the right cheek; the
reverse applies to a man.
228
4.
 
Conformity or deviation of colour according to season
The complexion colour should be assessed carefully in the light of
seasonal influences: if the influence of climatic factors of the
seasons exceeds that of the pathology of the five Yin organs, it is a
sign of a good prognosis; if the influence of the pathology of the
five Yin organs exceeds that of the climatic factors of the seasons
(the ‘Guest Qi’), it is a sign of a bad prognosis.
The chapter ‘Keys to the Four Diagnostic Methods’ in the
‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’ (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
) says:
The Qi of the five Yin organs manifests with the five different
[physiological] colours in accordance with the five different
types of body shapes. Such colours will never change and are
called Dominant Colours. The colours influenced by the
climatic factors of the four seasons will change accordingly and
are not the same all the time: they are called the Guest Colours.
The climate in Spring corresponds to the Liver, and the
complexion colour is relatively green. The climate in Summer
corresponds to the Heart, and the complexion colour is
relatively red. The climate in Autumn corresponds to the Lungs,
and the complexion colour is relatively white. The climate in
Winter corresponds to the Kidneys, and the complexion colour
is relatively dark. The climate in Late Summer corresponds to
the Spleen, and the complexion colour is relatively yellow.
These colours are seen when the climatic changes in the seasons
are normal. The Dominant Colours are a [physiological]
manifestation of the five Yin organs, while the Guest Colours
are produced by the climatic changes of the seasons. Therefore,
[when observing] the complexion colour, if the influence of the
climatic factors of the seasons exceeds that of the five Yin
organs, it indicates a good prognosis. That is why it is said
that the Guest colour replacing the Dominant colours is a sign
of good prognosis. If the influence of the five Yin organs exceeds
that of the climatic factors of the seasons, it is a sign of poor
prognosis. That is why it is said that the Dominant Colours
overtaking the Guest Colours is a sign of poor prognosis. The
229
so-called replacing of the colours is found in the following
situations: the complexion colour should be green [in Spring]
but is white instead; the complexion colour should be red [in
Summer] but is black instead; the complexion colour should be
white [in Autumn] but is red instead; the complexion colour
should be black [in Winter] but is yellow instead; and the
complexion colour should be yellow [in Late Summer] but is
green instead.
 
20
Reading the above quotation, it should be noted that a poor
prognosis is indicated when the dominant colour becomes
pathological, when it manifests in the ‘wrong’ season and,
specifically, when it belongs to the Element that overacts, along the
Overacting cycle, on the Element of that particular season. For
example, having a yellow (instead of greenish) complexion in
springtime indicates a poor prognosis but the prognosis would be
even worse if the complexion were white (because Metal overacts
on Wood).
Box 3.8
 
summarizes the factors that affect prognosis.
 
BOX 3.8
 
   
 
FACTORS AFFECTING
PROGNOSIS ACCORDING TO
COMPLEXION
• 
 
Presence or absence of lustre
• 
 
Thin or thick colour
• 
 
Conformity or rebelliousness of colour according to
face area
• 
 
Conformity or deviation of colour according to season
Changes In Complexion Colour During A
Disease
Observation
When observing complexion colour, in addition to the above-
mentioned aspects (i.e. whether the abnormal colour is superficial
230
or deep, distinct or obscure, lustrous or lustreless, scattered or
concentrated, conforming or opposing), attention should be paid
also to observing any changes in the complexion in the course of a
chronic disease.
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says:
If the complexion colour looks contained and slightly bright, it
indicates that the disease is mild. If the complexion colour is
dark and lustreless, it means that the disease is severe. If the
abnormal colour moves upwards [in the face], it is a sign of
aggravation of the disease. If the abnormal colour moves
downwards [in the face], like black clouds dissipating, it is a
sign of the gradual alleviation of the disease.
 
21
Clinical significance
The changes occurring in the complexion colour in the course of a
disease reflect the changes in the relative strength of pathogenic
factors and Upright Qi. Changes in the complexion colour
indicating a worsening of the condition are as follows: from
conforming to opposing, from thin to thick, from superficial to
deep, from distinct to obscure, from scattered to concentrated, and
from lustrous to lustreless. All these indicate that the disease is
moving from the Exterior to the Interior, pathogenic factors are
growing stronger, Upright Qi is getting weaker, the disease is
becoming more severe and the treatment given is not effective.
Changes in the complexion colour indicating an improvement in
the condition are as follows: from opposing to conforming, from
thick to thin, from deep to superficial, from obscure to distinct,
from concentrated to scattered, and from lustreless to lustrous. All
these signs indicate that the disease is moving from the Interior to
the Exterior, pathogenic factors are subsiding, the Upright Qi is
becoming stronger, the disease is getting better and the treatment
received is effective.
Complexion Colours And Emotions
Specific signs in the complexion may indicate various emotions.
Anger usually manifests with a greenish tinge on the cheeks or
231
under the eyes. If there is such a tinge on the forehead, it means
that Liver-Qi has invaded the Stomach; if on the tip of the nose,
that Liver-Qi has invaded the Spleen. Being prone to anger may
also be manifested by eyebrows that meet in the centre. In some
cases, if the anger is bottled up inside as resentment leading to
long-standing depression, the complexion may be pale. This is due
to the depressing effect of stagnant Liver-Qi on Spleen- or Lung-
Qi. In such cases, the Wiry quality of the pulse will betray the
existence of anger rather than sadness or grief (indicated by the
pale complexion) as a cause of disease.
Excess joy may manifest with a red colour on the cheekbones.
Worry causes a greyish complexion and a skin without lustre
because it knots Lung-Qi and affects the Corporeal Soul, which
manifests on the skin.
Pensiveness may manifest with a sallow complexion because it
depletes Spleen-Qi.
Fear shows with a bright-white complexion on the cheeks and
forehead. If chronic fear causes deficiency of Kidney-Yin and the
rising of Empty-Heat of the Heart, there will be a malar flush, with
the underlying colour being bright-white.
Shock also causes a bright-white complexion. Shock early in
childhood may manifest with a bluish tinge on the forehead. Such
a bluish tinge there or around the mouth indicates a prenatal
shock (while in the uterus).
Hatred often shows with a greenish complexion on the cheeks.
Craving shows with a reddish colour on the cheeks.
Guilt shows with a dark-ruddy complexion.
Box 3.9
 
summarizes the complexion colours associated with the
emotions.
 
BOX 3.9
 
   
 
EMOTIONS AND
COMPLEXION COLOURS
• 
 
Anger: greenish on cheeks or under eyes
• 
 
Excess joy: red on cheekbones
• 
 
Worry: greyish without lustre
• 
 
Pensiveness: sallow-yellow
• 
 
Fear: bright white on cheeks and forehead
• 
 
Shock: bright white or bluish
• 
 
Hatred: dull greenish without lustre
232
• 
 
Craving: reddish on cheeks
• 
 
Guilt: dark ruddy
COMPLEXION COLOURS
The complexion colours are:
 
• 
 
normal
• 
 
white
• 
 
sallow
• 
 
yellow
• 
 
red
• 
 
bluish/greenish
• 
 
dark
• 
 
purple.
Normal Complexion Colour
Observation
As ‘normality’ obviously varies from race to race, it is impossible
to define a universal normal colour. We can, however, identify and
define four essential characteristics of a normal complexion:
 
• 
 
lustre
• 
 
a subtle, slightly reddish hue
• 
 
‘contained’, ‘veiled’ colour
• 
 
moisture.
The presence of lustre is an essential part of a normal
complexion. Such a complexion is slightly shiny, vibrant in colour,
lively, relatively bright and glowing. The presence of lustre in the
complexion indicates that the Upright Qi is intact (even though
there may be a pathology) and that the Mind and Spirit are healthy.
233
The lustre of the complexion is equivalent to the spirit of the pulse
(one of the attributes of the normal pulse) or of the eyes; they all
indicate a good state of the Mind and Spirit.
The normal complexion should have a subtle, slightly reddish
hue because the facial colour as a whole reflects the state of the
Heart and a reddish hue indicates a good supply of Heart-Blood
(and by implication, a good state of the Mind).
The colour of the facial complexion should be ‘contained’ as if
there was a very thin, white silk veil over it. The book 
‘
Wang Zhen
Zun Jing
 
’ describes the normal complexion colour as being bright
and lustrous and says: ‘
The complexion is bright because of the
embodiment of the Spirit. It is lustrous because of the nourishment
of the Essence and Blood.
 
’
 
22
The normal complexion should be moist and look firm (because
of the fluids underneath); a dry complexion is always a poor
prognostic sign. The moisture of the complexion is equivalent to
the Stomach-Qi of the pulse (one of the attributes of the normal
pulse); they therefore both indicate that the patient’s Stomach-Qi
is intact (even though there may be pathogenic factors).
Apart from these four basic aspects of a normal complexion, the
actual colour of course varies enormously according to race and
even within the same racial group. The normal complexion colour
for Caucasian people is a mixed white and slightly reddish colour
which is lustrous, bright and contained. Within the Caucasian race,
however, there can be considerable variations in normal
complexion: for example, the normal complexion of a Norwegian
person will be quite different from that of a Spaniard as the
Mediterranean complexion is naturally slightly darker and of a
more earthy colour than that of the northern European. The
complexion of Chinese people is described in Chinese books as a
mixed red and yellow colour, shown slightly, which is bright,
lustrous and reserved.
The same wide variations may be observed in Asian, African and
Afro-American people. For example, the complexion of people in
north India is much lighter than that of Indians from the south.
Apart from racial differences, there can be wide variations in
normal complexion in people of the same race due to other factors
such as the influence of prenatal constitution, the profession, the
234
area people come from and their working or living environment.
However, complexion colour changes caused by the above-
mentioned factors are not regarded as abnormal. For example, the
normal complexion of a farmer will be rosier and redder than that
of an office worker (see 
Plate 3.9 on p. P4
 
).
Clinical significance
A bright, lustrous, white-reddish and ‘contained’ complexion
colour in Caucasian people indicates strong Stomach-Qi, normal
Internal Organs, ample Blood and good Spirit. This is regarded as
a normal complexion colour. If such a complexion colour is
observed in the process of a disease, it means that the duration of
the disease is short, the pathogenic factors are weak, the Upright
Qi is still strong, the treatment will be easy and the prognosis is
good. 
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says:
In the course of a disease, if the pulse is small and the
complexion colour is normal, it is a disease with a short
duration. If the pulse is normal but the complexion colour is
abnormal, it is a disease with a long duration. If both the pulse
and the complexion colour are abnormal, it is a disease with a
long duration. If both the pulse and the complexion colour are
normal, it is a disease with a short duration.’
 
23
This highlights the connection between complexion colour and
the duration of a disease.
Box 3.10
 
summarizes the attributes of a normal complexion.
 
BOX 3.10
 
   
 
ATTRIBUTES OF A NORMAL
COMPLEXION
• 
 
Lustre: Spirit strong
• 
 
Subtle reddish hue: Heart-Blood abundant
• 
 
‘Contained’, ‘veiled’ colour: no pathogenic factors
• 
 
Moisture: good state of fluids
235
White Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
There are several shades of white complexion:
 
• 
 
bright white
• 
 
dull white
• 
 
pale white
• 
 
sallow white
• 
 
bluish white.
Bright white
Observation
The bright-white complexion is of a brilliant and obvious white
colour (see 
Plate 3.10 on p. P4
 
).
Clinical significance
The bright-white complexion usually indicates Yang deficiency,
which may affect especially the Spleen, Stomach, Lungs, Heart and
Kidneys.
Dull white
Observation
The dull-white complexion has no lustre and is somewhat greyish
(see 
Plate 3.11 on p. P4
 
).
Clinical significance
The dull-white complexion also indicates Yang deficiency but of a
more severe degree than that indicated by the bright-white
complexion.
A dull-white complexion that looks like dry bones indicates
Lung-Yang deficiency.
Pale white
236
Observation
The pale-white complexion is also somewhat bright like the bright-
white complexion but to a lesser degree (see 
Plate 3.12 on p. P4
 
).
Clinical significance
The pale-white complexion indicates Qi deficiency.
Sallow white
Observation
The sallow-white complexion is dull, without lustre and with a
slight hint of yellow (see 
Plates 3.13
 
and 
Plate 3.14 on pp. P4 and
P5
 
).
Clinical significance
The sallow-white complexion indicates Blood deficiency. A further
differentiation can be made according to subtle variations of the
sallow-white colour. For example, a sallow-white complexion which
is also very slightly bluish indicates severe Blood deficiency; a
sallow-white complexion which is also slightly yellow indicates Qi
deficiency not holding Blood with resulting bleeding; a sallow-
white tip of the nose indicates Blood deficiency deriving from
Spleen deficiency; a sallow-white complexion without lustre
indicates Qi and Blood deficiency with Dryness, while a sallow-
white and slightly yellow complexion in women after childbirth
indicates exhaustion of Blood.
Bluish-white
Observation
The bluish-white complexion is bright-white with a subtle bluish
hue.
Clinical significance
The bluish-white complexion indicates Cold that derives from
Yang deficiency. The bright-white complexion described above may
also indicate Cold but the emphasis is on Yang deficiency, whereas
237
with the bluish-white complexion the emphasis is on Cold.
Box 3.11
 
summarizes the types of white complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.11
 
   
 
WHITE COMPLEXION
COLOUR
• 
 
Bright white: Yang deficiency (Spleen, Stomach,
Lungs, Heart, Kidneys)
• 
 
Dull white: severe Yang deficiency
• 
 
Pale white: Qi deficiency
• 
 
Sallow white: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Bluish-white: Cold
Sallow Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
Observation
The sallow complexion is pale, yellowish, dull and without lustre.
Clinical significance
The sallow complexion usually indicates Spleen-Qi deficiency with
Dampness. In some cases it may indicate chronic Kidney-Yang
deficiency; if it is greyish, it may indicate Blood stasis.
Box 3.12
 
summarizes sallow complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.12
 
   
 
SALLOW COMPLEXION
COLOUR
• 
 
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Blood stasis: sallow greyish
Yellow Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 56
 
and
 
68
There are several types of yellow complexion:
238
 
• 
 
dull yellow
• 
 
greyish-yellow
• 
 
bluish-yellow
• 
 
floating, reddish-yellow
• 
 
floating yellow
• 
 
dry yellow
• 
 
ash-like yellow
• 
 
rich yellow
• 
 
bright yellow (jaundice).
Dull yellow
Observation
The dull-yellow complexion is relatively pale yellow, wan, sallow
and without lustre (see 
Plate 3.15 on p. P5
 
).
Clinical significance
The dull-yellow complexion always indicates a deficient, chronic
condition and usually a deficiency of Blood. The dull-yellow
complexion may also indicate a chronic deficiency of Spleen-Qi.
Greyish-yellow
Observation
The greyish-yellow complexion is dull, ashen and without lustre
(see 
Plate 3.16 on p. P5
 
).
Clinical significance
The greyish-yellow complexion is frequently seen in disharmonies
of the Spleen and Liver characterized by Spleen-Qi deficiency and
stagnation of Liver-Qi and/or Liver-Blood. This condition is
frequently caused by deep emotional problems and symptoms
may include severe abdominal distension, depression, irritability
and poor digestion.
239
Bluish-yellow
Observation
A bluish-yellow complexion is primarily dark yellow with a slight
bluish tinge; it is usually seen only in the elderly.
Clinical significance
A bluish-yellow complexion indicates Blood stasis with Damp-
Heat.
Floating, reddish-yellow
Observation
A floating, reddish-yellow complexion is bright yellow with a slight
red tinge and it gives the appearance of being on the surface of the
skin.
Clinical significance
A floating, reddish-yellow complexion indicates an invasion of
Wind-Heat.
Floating yellow
Observation
The floating yellow complexion is bright yellow and gives the
impression of being on the surface of the skin (see 
Plate 3.17 on p.
P5
 
).
Clinical significance
A floating yellow complexion indicates an invasion of external
Wind-Dampness.
Dry yellow
Observation
The dry-yellow complexion is dull and without lustre and the skin
is dry, withered and without elasticity (see 
Plate 3.18 on p. P5
 
).
240
Clinical significance
The dry-yellow complexion always indicates a disharmony of the
Stomach and Spleen, usually due to Heat, which may be Full or
Empty.
A thin, dry, yellow colour indicates Stomach Empty-Heat.
Ash-like yellow
Observation
The ash-like yellow complexion is dull, darkish and ‘smoky’. It is
darker than the greyish-yellow complexion (see 
Plate 3.19 on p. P5
).
Clinical significance
The ash-like yellow complexion always indicates Dampness, often
with Heat. It may indicate external Dampness, in which case the
patient often suffers from body aches, or internal Dampness, in
which case the complexion is slightly dryer and there are no body
aches. The ash-like yellow complexion is also seen when
Dampness is associated with Qi stagnation.
Rich yellow
Observation
The rich-yellow complexion is relatively bright and the colour is
thick (see 
Plate 3.20 on p. P6
 
).
Clinical significance
A rich-yellow complexion indicates Qi and Blood deficiency with
Dampness.
Bright yellow (jaundice)
Observation
Patients with jaundice have yellow conjunctiva and a yellow
complexion colour, which may be either bright yellow, orangey
yellow or dark yellow as if smoked, yellow scanty urine, general
241
weakness, listlessness and a greasy tongue coating.
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
Symptoms such as
deep yellow urine and lethargy indicate jaundice… yellow
conjunctiva indicates jaundice.
 
’
 
24
 
Chapter 74
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’
says: 
‘
If the face is slightly yellow, the teeth filthy yellow, the nails
yellow, this indicates jaundice. (If there are also symptoms and
signs such as lethargy, deep yellow urine, poor appetite and a
Small-Choppy pulse, it then indicates that it is the disease of the
Spleen.
 
)’
 
25
Clinical significance
The aetiology of jaundice, manifesting with yellow conjunctiva and
a yellow complexion colour, is often related to poor diet and
invasion by pathogenic factors such as Damp, Heat and Toxic Heat.
It is often located in the Liver, Gall-Bladder, Spleen and Stomach.
The nature of the disease is often one of either Damp-Heat, Cold-
Damp, Toxic Heat, or Qi and Blood deficiency. Signs and symptoms
such as a 
bright-yellow colour like an orange (called ‘Yang yellow’),
a Red tongue with a thick coating, yellow urine and abdominal
distension indicate that the disease is caused by the accumulation
of Damp-Heat in the Liver, Gall-Bladder, Spleen and Stomach.
Signs and symptoms such as a dark-yellow, smoky colour (called
‘Yin yellow’) and a light-Red tongue body with a thick white
coating indicate that the disease is caused by Cold-Damp being
retained in the Liver, Gall-Bladder, Spleen and Stomach.
Box 3.13
 
summarizes the types of yellow complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.13
 
   
 
YELLOW COMPLEXION
COLOUR
• 
 
Pale yellow: Spleen-Qi deficiency, Blood deficiency
• 
 
Greyish-yellow: Spleen-Qi deficiency with stagnation
of Liver-Qi or Liver-Blood
• 
 
Dry yellow: Full- or Empty-Heat in Stomach and
Spleen
• 
 
Ash-like yellow: Dampness
• 
 
Rich yellow: Qi and Blood deficiency with Dampness
• 
 
Bright yellow: Jaundice
242
Red Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
A red complexion always indicates Heat, which may be Full or
Empty; it indicates Empty-Heat particularly when only the cheeks
are red. Redness of the complexion also indicates Empty-Heat
when it is somewhat ‘thin’ or ‘superficial’ as defined above.
The clinical significance of the red complexion depends also on
the location of the redness. There are three main types of red
complexion:
 
• 
 
red cheeks
• 
 
red cheekbones
• 
 
floating red.
Red cheeks
Observation
In this case, the facial complexion is too red and the redness is
located all over the cheeks; in some cases one cheek may be redder
than the other. Usually the right cheek reflects the condition of the
Lungs whereas the left one reflects the condition of the Liver (see
Plates 3.21
 
and 
3.22 on p. P6
 
).
Clinical significance
A red facial complexion usually indicates Full-Heat, which may
pertain to various organs, especially the Heart, Lungs, Liver or
Stomach. In cases of Full Heat, the whole cheeks are of a full red
colour. In some cases, a red complexion may be seen in Empty-
Heat, in which case the red colour looks ‘thinner’ and it may come
and go.
Red cheekbones
Observation
In this case, only the cheekbones are red and the colour is usually
‘thinner’ than that of Full-Heat; the redness of the cheekbones
243
may come and go and often it appears only in the afternoon or
evening (see 
Plates 3.23
 
and 
3.24 on p. P6
 
).
Clinical significance
Red cheekbones always indicate Empty-Heat, which may affect
various organs and especially the Lungs, Heart, Stomach and
Kidneys. The clinical significance may be further differentiated
according to the type of redness and to the time of day when it
appears.
A relatively thin red colour that looks like makeup and appears
in the afternoon indicates Blood deficiency; if both cheekbones are
deep red this indicates Empty-Heat; if both cheekbones are fresh
red like threads it indicates Yin deficiency; if both cheekbones are
pale red it indicates ‘steaming from the bones’ due to chronic Yin
deficiency.
 
!
Note
 
: do not assume that red cheekbones always
indicate Yin deficiency; they may also indicate Blood
deficiency especially if obvious in the afternoon
(common in women).
Floating red
Observation
The floating red colour is a ‘thin’, floating, pale red that looks like
rouge and may move from place to place (see 
Plate 3.25 on p. P6
 
).
Clinical significance
The floating red colour generally indicates Empty-Heat. It is seen
also in the pattern characterized by false Heat and true Cold,
which means that the patient suffers from severe internal Cold
and the separation of Yin and Yang which makes Yang ‘float’ to the
top giving the false appearance of Heat. In fact, apart from the
redness of the face, all the other signs and symptoms point to
internal Cold (cold limbs, a desire to curl up, weak breathing, Pale
and Short tongue and Slow pulse). However, this situation is rather
244
rare.
Plates 3.26–3.31 on p. P7
 
Plate 3.27
 
Plate 3.28
 
Plate 3.29
 
Plate 3.30
Plate 3.31
 
illustrate thin/thick, superficial/deep and
distinct/obscure red complexion colours.
Box 3.14
 
summarizes the types of red complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.14
 
   
 
RED COMPLEXION COLOUR
• 
 
Red cheeks: Full-Heat (Heart, Lungs, Liver, Stomach)
• 
 
Red cheekbones: Empty-Heat (Lungs, Heart, Stomach,
Kidneys) or Blood deficiency
• 
 
Floating red: Empty-Heat or False Heat–true Cold
Bluish/Greenish Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
‘Bluish/greenish’ is a translation of the Chinese word 
qing
 
which
can mean both blue and green. In the context of the Five Elements,
it is the colour associated with Wood and it therefore makes more
sense to translate it as green. In the context of facial diagnosis,
qing
 
can mean either bluish or greenish; for example, the 
qing
colour may indicate a Liver pattern, in which case it would be
greenish, or interior Cold, in which case it would be bluish (see
Plate 3.32 on p. P8
 
).
There are various types of bluish/greenish colour:
 
• 
 
pale greenish under the eyes
• 
 
dark bluish under the eyes
• 
 
white-bluish
• 
 
dull bluish
• 
 
bluish
• 
 
greenish.
Pale greenish under the eyes
Observation
245
A pale-greenish colour under the eyes is usually thin and rather
bright.
Clinical significance
A pale-greenish colour under the eyes generally indicates Liver-Qi
stagnation.
Dark bluish under the eyes
Observation
A dark-bluish colour under the eyes usually lacks lustre and is
dull.
Clinical significance
A dark-blue colour under the eyes indicates Cold in the Liver
channel.
White-bluish
Observation
The white-bluish complexion is bright.
Clinical significance
The white-bluish complexion generally indicates internal Cold or
chronic pain.
Dull bluish
Observation
The dull-bluish complexion is ash-like and without lustre.
Clinical significance
The dull-bluish complexion indicates severe Heart-Yang deficiency
with Blood stasis or chronic pain, or both. The duller and darker
this complexion, the more severe is the condition.
Bluish
246
Observation
The bluish complexion is bright blue and it is usually confined to
the lower part of the forehead or the space between the eyebrows
in children.
Clinical significance
A bright-bluish complexion in the space between the eyebrows in
children indicates Liver-Wind and it is often seen in convulsions.
A bluish complexion in pregnant women indicates Blood stasis
and Yang deficiency and it is always a poor sign.
Greenish
Observation
The greenish complexion is dull green, somewhat greyish and
without lustre.
Clinical significance
The greenish complexion always indicates a Liver pattern, which
may be Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood stasis, Cold in the Liver
channel or Liver-Wind.
A green complexion with a red tinge is seen in the Lesser-Yang
syndrome. A green complexion with red eyes indicates Liver-Fire.
Yellowish green cheeks indicate Phlegm with Liver-Yang rising
often causing headaches.
A green nose indicates stagnation of Qi often causing abdominal
pain. A dark, reddish-green complexion indicates stagnant Liver-
Qi turning into Heat. A pale-green colour under the eyes indicates
Liver-Blood deficiency. A grass-green indicates collapse of Liver-Qi.
Box 3.15
 
summarizes bluish/greenish complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.15
 
   
 
BLUISH/GREENISH
COMPLEXION COLOUR
• 
 
Pale greenish under the eyes: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Dark bluish under the eyes: Cold in the Liver channel
• 
 
White-bluish: Cold or chronic pain
• 
 
Dull bluish: severe Heart-Yang deficiency with Blood
stasis, chronic pain
247
• 
 
Bluish (in children): Liver-Wind
• 
 
Greenish: Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood stasis,
Cold in the Liver channel, Liver-Wind
• 
 
Green with a red tinge: Lesser-Yang syndrome
• 
 
Green with red eyes: Liver-Fire
• 
 
Yellowish-green cheeks: Phlegm with Liver-Yang
rising
• 
 
Green nose: stagnation of Qi with abdominal pain
• 
 
Dark reddish-green: stagnant Liver-Qi turning into
Heat
• 
 
Pale green under the eyes: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Grass-like green: collapse of Liver-Qi
Dark Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
There are several types of dark complexion:
 
• 
 
dark and dry
• 
 
dull dark
• 
 
faint dark
• 
 
very dark.
Dark and dry
Observation
The dark and dry complexion is blackish, the skin is dry and
withered and the ear-lobes are dry.
Clinical significance
The dark and dry complexion indicates severe Kidney-Yin
deficiency.
Dull dark
248
Observation
The dark and dull complexion is blackish but faint and dim and
the eye sockets are dark.
Clinical significance
The dark and dull complexion indicates severe Kidney-Yang
deficiency with Empty-Cold.
A dark colour around the eye sockets indicates Kidney
deficiency with Phlegm-Fluids or Cold-Dampness in the Lower
Burner.
A dull-dark complexion like soot indicates the collapse of
Kidney-Qi.
Faint dark
Observation
The faint-dark complexion is slightly blackish with a light hue and
with a blackish colour around the eye sockets; the face might be
swollen.
Clinical significance
The faint-dark complexion indicates severe Damp-Cold or Phlegm-
Fluids.
Very dark
Observation
The very dark complexion is almost black, dull and without lustre.
Clinical significance
The very dark complexion indicates severe Blood stasis.
Box 3.16
 
summarizes the types of dark complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.16
 
   
 
DARK COMPLEXION
COLOUR
• 
 
Dark and dry: Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dull dark: Kidney-Yang deficiency with internal Cold
249
• 
 
Dark around the eye sockets: Kidney deficiency with
Phlegm-Fluids or Cold-Dampness in the Lower Burner
• 
 
Dull dark like soot: collapse of Kidney-Qi
• 
 
Faint dark: Damp-Cold or Phlegm-Fluids
• 
 
Very dark: Blood stasis
Purple Complexion Colour
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 56
There are two types of purple complexion colour:
 
• 
 
reddish-purple
• 
 
bluish-purple.
Reddish-purple
Observation
The reddish-purple complexion approximates to the colour of a
beetroot and is very similar to the colour of a reddish-purple
tongue.
Clinical significance
The reddish-purple complexion indicates severe Blood stasis.
Bluish-purple
Observation
The bluish-purple complexion approximates to the colour of a
blueberry but with a lighter hue and is very similar to the colour of
the bluish-purple tongue.
Clinical significance
The bluish-purple complexion indicates severe internal Cold
leading to Blood stasis. The bluish-purple complexion is also seen
250
in cases of poisoning from food, drugs or toxic herbs.
Box 3.17
 
summarizes the types of purple complexion colour.
 
BOX 3.17
 
   
 
PURPLE COMPLEXION
COLOUR
• 
 
Reddish-purple: Blood stasis
• 
 
Bluish-purple: internal Cold leading to Blood stasis,
or poisoning
NOTES
1. 
Cited in Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang
Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan: Shanxi Science
Publishing House, 1995; 82.
2. 
Principles of Medical Practice 1658, cited in Wang Ke Qin
1988 Theory of the Mind in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi
Shen Zhu Xue Shuo
 
 
), Ancient Chinese Medical Texts
Publishing House, p. 56.
3. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 82
4. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:80 First
published c. 100
BC
5. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 291.
6. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:96 First published c. 100
BC
7. 
Qian, Wu. Golden Mirror of Medicine (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
); vol. 2. People’s Health Publishing House, Beijing,
1977:872. [First published in 1742].
8. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 85
9. 
Simple Questions, p. 89.
251
10. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 85
11. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 98
12. 
Cited in Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in
Chinese Medicine, p. 86
13. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 98
14. 
Shi Pa Nan 1861 Origin of Medicine (
Yi Yuan
 
 
), cited in
Wang Ke Qin 1988 Theory of the Mind in Chinese
Medicine, p. 55.
15. 
Simple Questions, pp. 71–2.
16. 
Simple Questions, pp. 72.
17. 
Simple Questions, pp. 99.
18. 
Chen Shi Duo 1687 Secret Records of the Stone Room (
Shi
Shi Mi Lu
 
 
), cited in Wang Ke Qin 1988 Theory of the
Mind in Chinese Medicine, p. 56.
19. 
Simple Questions, p. 90.
20. 
Golden Mirror of Medicine, vol. 2, pp. 866–867
21. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 97
22. 
Cited in Zhang Shu Sheng 1995 Great Treatise of Diagnosis
by Observation in Chinese Medicine, p. 89
23. 
Simple Questions, p. 98.
24. 
Simple Questions, p. 114.
25. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 134
252
CHAPTER 4
 
OBSERVATION
OF BODY
MOVEMENTS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
HEAD
Tremor of the head
Rigidity of the neck
FACE
Deviation of eye and mouth
Facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy)
Facial tic
LIMBS AND BODY
Paralysis
Tremor or spasticity of the limbs
Twitching of the muscles
Opisthotonos
253
Contraction of the limbs
Hemiplegia
Tremor of the hands
Tremor of the feet
Contraction of the fingers
The discussion of ‘body movements’ includes both involuntary
body movements and their opposite, that is, rigidity or paralysis.
HEAD
The signs discussed are:
 
• 
 
tremor of the head
• 
 
rigidity of the neck.
Tremor Of The Head
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
Tremor of the head consists of shaking of the head, with the head
usually moving back and forth. The tremor ranges from the very
slight with small amplitude to the very pronounced with large
amplitude.
Clinical significance
A tremor of the head always indicates internal Wind, which itself
stems from the Liver. Liver-Wind may be of the Full or Empty type:
the Full type develops from Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Fire while
the Empty type develops from Liver- and Kidney-Yin or Liver-
Blood deficiency. The tremor of the head is pronounced in the Full
type and slight in the Empty type. In a few cases, the cause may be
254
exhaustion of Heart-Yin, in which case the tremor will usually be a
fine one.
Rigidity Of The Neck
Observation
‘Rigidity of the neck’ indicates that the patient finds it difficult to
bend the head forwards or backwards and to turn the head from
side to side.
Clinical significance
In acute situations, rigidity of the neck may indicate an invasion of
external Wind, in which case it will be accompanied by all the
typical manifestations of an exterior invasion such as aversion to
cold, fever, headache and a Floating pulse. Both Wind-Cold and
Wind-Heat may cause rigidity of the neck but it is more likely to
occur with an invasion of Wind-Cold (in fact, it is one of the chief
symptoms of invasion of Wind-Cold as listed in the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Diseases’ – see Bibliography, 
p. 1067
 
). Another
possible acute condition causing stiffness of the neck occurs when
external Cold and Dampness invade the muscles of the neck, in
which case there is also pronounced neck pain; this is a case of
acute Painful Obstruction Syndrome and it is relatively common.
In chronic cases, stiffness of the neck is due either to a weakness
of the Bladder channel in the neck occurring against a background
of Kidney deficiency or to internal Wind, both of which are more
common in the elderly.
Box 4.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying neck rigidity.
 
BOX 4.1
 
   
 
RIGIDITY OF THE NECK
• 
 
Rigidity with aversion to cold, Floating pulse: invasion
of external Wind
• 
 
Rigidity and pain: invasion of external Cold and
Dampness
• 
 
Slight rigidity and dizziness: Bladder and Kidney
deficiency
• 
 
Slight rigidity and dizziness: Bladder and Kidney
deficiency
255
FACE
The face signs discussed are:
 
• 
 
deviation of eye and mouth
• 
 
facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy)
• 
 
facial tic.
Deviation Of Eye And Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
Deviation of eyes and mouth consists in the mouth’s being pulled
towards the healthy side and an inability to close or open the eye
completely; in addition, the patient finds it difficult to grimace, to
bulge the cheeks, grin and whistle.
Clinical significance
Deviation of eye and mouth is a consequence of Wind-stroke and
is usually seen in middle-aged or elderly people; it always indicates
internal Wind affecting the muscles of the face.
When deviation of eyes and mouth follows a stroke, it is called
central facial paralysis in Western medicine, as it arises from the
central nervous system. In facial paralysis following Wind-stroke,
the nerves above the eyes are not affected, that is, the movement
of the eyebrows and furrowing of the forehead are normal. By
contrast, in peripheral facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy), the patient will
be unable to raise the eyebrow or furrow the forehead on the
paralysed side. 
Figure 4.1
 
shows the deviation of eye and mouth.
256
FIG. 4.1
 
Deviation of eye and mouth
Facial Paralysis (Bell’s Palsy)
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 55
Facial paralysis is due to an injury of peripheral nerves, whereas
deviation of eyes and mouth following a stroke is due to the
central nervous system. From a Chinese perspective, facial
paralysis is due to an invasion of external Wind, whereas deviation
of eyes and mouth following a stroke is due to internal Wind.
Observation
Facial paralysis is characterized by deviation of the mouth,
incomplete closure of one eye and inability to grimace, grin, bulge
the cheeks, whistle, or raise the eyebrow and furrow the forehead
on the affected side (see 
Plate 4.1 on p. P8
 
).
Clinical significance
Facial paralysis is due to invasion of external Wind in the muscles
of the face and primarily in the Bright-Yang channels.
Facial Tic
257
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
Tic consists in an involuntary twitching of the face muscles.
Clinical significance
In Chinese medicine a facial tic may be due to various patterns,
among which are Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood deficiency, Liver-
Wind, Liver-Wind with Phlegm and external Wind.
When due to Liver-Qi stagnation, facial tic will be accompanied
by irritability, depression, tendency to crying, abdominal
distension, headache and a Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency causes facial paralysis by failing to
nourish the muscles of the face and giving rise to Empty-Wind;
other symptoms may include dizziness, blurred vision, dull-pale
complexion and a Choppy pulse.
Liver-Wind may lead to facial tic because it is in the nature of
internal Wind to cause involuntary movements. Facial tic caused
by Liver-Wind is more common in the elderly and is accompanied
by vertigo, headache, loss of balance and a Wiry pulse.
In the elderly, Liver-Wind frequently combines with Phlegm,
both of which may lead to facial tic. Other symptoms include
vertigo, nausea, headache, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a
tendency to being overweight, a Swollen tongue and a Wiry-
Slippery pulse.
External Wind may cause a temporary facial tic.
Box 4.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying facial tic.
 
BOX 4.2
 
   
 
FACIAL TIC
• 
 
Tic and irritability, depression, Wiry pulse: Liver-Qi
stagnation
• 
 
Tic and dizziness, blurred vision, Choppy pulse:
Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Tic and vertigo, Wiry pulse: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Tic and vertigo, nausea, Wiry-Slippery pulse: Liver-
Wind with Phlegm
• 
 
Temporary tic: external Wind
258
LIMBS AND BODY
The limb and body signs discussed are:
 
• 
 
paralysis
• 
 
tremor or spasticity of the limbs
• 
 
twitching of the muscles
• 
 
opisthotonos
• 
 
contraction of the limbs
• 
 
hemiplegia
• 
 
tremor of the hands
• 
 
tremor of the feet
• 
 
contraction of the fingers.
Paralysis
Observation,
 
Chapters 18
 
and 
19
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Paralysis is called 
Tan Huan
 
in Chinese, which can be written
with two different sets of characters, the second one of which
means ‘spread out’ and ‘relaxed’ (see Glossary, 
p. 1061
 
).
Observation
In paralysis, a weakness of the muscles of the four limbs impedes
the proper function of the legs or arms, or both. Paralysis is seen
only in chronic, protracted conditions and is usually, but not
always, accompanied by flaccidity of the muscles, in which case, in
Chinese medicine, it pertains to the disease category of Atrophy
(
Wei
 
syndrome). In mild cases, paralysis consists in a weakness of
arms or legs which creates a slowness of movement, whilst in
severe cases movement of the arms or legs, or both, is severly
impaired or completely impossible and the patient is confined to a
wheelchair.
In Western medicine, this type of paralysis is frequently seen in
spinal injuries or neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis
or motor-neurone disease.
Clinical significance
259
Paralysis may be due to many different patterns depending on the
severity of the disease.
Generally speaking, in the beginning stages of paralysis there
may be invasion of external Dampness occurring against a
background of Deficiency.
In the later stages, paralysis is often due to a general deficiency
of Qi and Blood, and in particular a deficiency of Stomach and
Spleen, which become unable to transport Qi to the limbs.
In yet later stages, the main pattern emerging in paralysis is a
deficiency of Liver and Kidneys, which may manifest with Yin or
Yang deficiency. At such a stage, the condition is complicated by
the possible development of pathogenic factors such as internal
Wind (which may cause spasticity of the limbs), Blood stasis
(which may cause pain in the limbs) or Phlegm (which may cause
numbness of the limbs).
In acute febrile diseases which progress to the Blood level, Yin
deficiency may develop leading to the severe malnourishment of
the channels and therefore to paralysis; this is, for example, the
pathology of the paralysis deriving from poliomyelitis.
Of course, paralysis deriving from a spinal injury is different as
it is due to external trauma and does not fall under any of the
above patterns. However, in a patient suffering from a paralysis
from spinal injury, this condition itself will, in time, lead to a
deficiency of Stomach and Spleen.
Box 4.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying paralysis.
 
BOX 4.3
 
   
 
PARALYSIS
• 
 
Slight weakness of the limbs, feeling of heaviness:
invasion of external Dampness
• 
 
Weakness of the limbs, difficulty in walking:
deficiency of Qi and Blood (Stomach and Spleen)
• 
 
Severe difficulty in walking: deficiency of Liver and
Kidneys
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis is an example of paralysis that is commonly seen
260
in Western, industrialized countries and one can identify clearly
the above patterns in its pathological development. There are four
stages in the pathological progression of multiple sclerosis (
Box 4.4
). The very beginning stage is characterized by invasion of external
Dampness and the symptoms are purely numbness and tingling.
The second stage is characterized by deficiency of the Stomach and
Spleen and at this stage the patient begins to experience difficulty
in walking. The third stage is characterized by deficiency of Liver
and Kidneys, which fail to nourish the sinews and bones, and the
patient experiences severe difficulty in walking and urinary
incontinence deriving from the Kidney deficiency. The fourth stage
is characterized by the development of pathogenic factors, which
may be internal Wind, itself deriving from the Liver and Kidney
deficiency and causing spasticity of the limbs, or Blood stasis
causing pain in the limbs.
 
BOX 4.4
 
   
 
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
1. 
 
Dampness: numbness and tingling
2. 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency: difficulty in walking
3. 
 
Deficiency of Liver and Kidneys: severe difficulty in
walking and urinary incontinence
4. 
 
Internal Wind: spasticity of limbs
5. 
 
Blood stasis: pain in the limbs
Tremor Or Spasticity Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapters 14
 
and 
18
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
and 
66
‘Tremor or spasticity of the limbs’ is a translation of the Chinese
characters 
zhi zhong. Zhi
 
means ‘contraction or bending of the
limbs’ and 
zhong
 
means ‘relaxation or stretching of the limbs’;
however, these two terms may indicate both spasticity and tremor
of the limbs.
Observation
The patient may suffer from contraction, relaxation or tremor of
261
the limbs.
Clinical significance
Spasticity or tremor of the limbs may be due to many different
patterns. Liver-Wind is the most likely pattern to cause this
condition in its three possible manifestations, that is, Full-Wind
deriving from Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Fire, Empty-Wind deriving
from Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency, or Wind combined with
Phlegm. In cases of Full-Wind, the spasticity or tremor of the limbs
is pronounced and the patient also suffers from pronounced
vertigo. In cases of Empty-Wind, the spasticity or tremor is mild
and the patient will display the symptoms of Liver-Blood or Liver-
Yin deficiency. When Wind combines with Phlegm the patient will
also suffer from numbness and heaviness of the limbs, the tongue
is Swollen and the pulse is Wiry-Slippery. Epilepsy is an example of
a disease usually characterized by internal Wind and Phlegm.
The same symptoms may be caused by a general deficiency of Qi
and Blood failing to nourish the sinews and muscles, in which case
they are mild.
Spasticity and tremor of the limbs may also appear at the Blood
level (of the Four Levels) when the Heat generated by the febrile
disease either leads to Liver-Wind or depletes the Yin to such an
extent that Empty-Wind is generated.
Box 4.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying tremor or spacticity of
the limbs.
 
BOX 4.5
 
   
 
TREMOR OR SPASTICITY OF
THE LIMBS
• 
 
Severe spasticity or tremor with large amplitude,
vertigo, Wiry pulse: Liver-Wind (Full type)
• 
 
Mild spasticity or tremor with small amplitude,
dizziness, Fine-Wiry pulse: Liver-Wind (Empty type)
• 
 
Numbness and heaviness of the limbs, Swollen
tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse: Liver-Wind with Phlegm
• 
 
Mild spasticity or tremor of the limbs, tiredness, Pale
tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse: Qi and Blood deficiency
262
Twitching Of The Muscles
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Observation
Twitching of the muscles consists in an involuntary quivering or
vibration of the superficial muscles: in Western medicine this is
called ‘fasciculation’.
Clinical significance
Twitching of the muscles may be due to Yang deficiency, Water
overflowing or Qi and Blood deficiency.
In Yang deficiency, twitching of the muscles is due to the
Defensive Qi (which is Yang in nature) not nourishing the
superficial muscles. 
Chapter 3
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The
refined part of Yang-Qi nourishes the Mind while the soft part
nourishes the sinews.
 
’
 
1
Water overflowing indicates a condition of severe Yang
deficiency leading to the accumulation of fluids, which may occur
in the Heart, the Lungs or the muscles. The accumulation of Water
in the muscles may cause them to twitch.
General Qi and Blood deficiency may also cause twitching of the
muscles when Yang Qi fails to nourish the superficial muscles and
Blood fails to nourish the muscles and sinews.
Box 4.6
 
summarizes patterns underlying twitching of the
muscles.
 
BOX 4.6
 
   
 
TWITCHING OF THE
MUSCLES
• 
 
Twitching with feeling of cold, tiredness, Deep-Slow
pulse: Yang deficiency
• 
 
Twitching with oedema, coughing of profuse watery
phlegm, Wet tongue: Water overflowing
• 
 
Twitching with tiredness, dizziness, Pale tongue,
Weak or Choppy pulse: Qi and Blood deficiency
263
Opisthotonos
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Observation
Opisthotonos indicates a spasm in which the head and heel are
bent backward and the body bent forward (
Fig. 4.2
 
).
FIG. 4.2
 
Opisthotonos
Clinical significance
Opisthotonos is always due to Liver-Wind, which develops at the
Blood level of a febrile disease. It may also occur after childbirth
when the mother suffers from an infection but this is rarely seen
in modern Western countries.
Contraction Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Observation
Contraction of the limbs consists in an involuntary clenching of
the fists or contraction of the feet accompanied by rigidity of the
affected limbs and the inability of the patient to stretch them.
Contraction may affect any joint such as fingers, wrist, elbow,
ankle and knees. Dupuytren’s contracture, often involving the ring
finger or the little finger, is an example of this condition.
Clinical significance
Contraction of the limbs may occur in various diseases such as
arthritis, convulsions or Wind-stroke. The patterns causing it are
usually general deficiency of Qi and Blood, internal Wind, Cold,
264
Dampness, Phlegm or Blood stasis; in most cases the Liver and
Kidney organs 
are particularly involved because they nourish
sinews and bones.
A general deficiency of Qi and Blood may cause a contraction of
a particular joint due to Blood not nourishing the sinews. For
example, a deficiency of Blood may affect the channels of the
elbow and cause a contraction of that joint.
Internal Liver-Wind may cause contraction of any joint and this
is frequently seen after an attack of Wind-stroke.
Cold by its very nature has a tendency to contract and may
therefore cause a contraction of any joint; frequently seen in
Painful Obstruction Syndrome, this often affects the elbow or knee
and is accompanied by pain.
Dampness may cause contraction of a joint by obstructing the
sinews and muscles; this is also seen in Painful Obstruction
Syndrome and it affects particularly the wrist or fingers causing
not only contraction but also swelling.
Phlegm may also cause contraction of a joint by obstructing the
sinews, muscles and bones; this is seen in the late stages of Painful
Obstruction Syndrome from Cold or Dampness complicated by
Phlegm and it manifests not only with a contraction of the joint
but also with bone deformities.
Blood stasis causes contraction and rigidity of joints because the
Blood fails to nourish the sinews and bones and stagnates in the
joints; this is seen also in the late stages of Painful Obstruction
Syndrome from Dampness or Cold complicated by Blood stasis,
which causes intense pain and rigidity.
Box 4.7
 
summarizes patterns underlying contraction of the
limbs.
 
BOX 4.7
 
   
 
CONTRACTION OF LIMBS
• 
 
Mild contraction, tiredness, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse: Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Pronounced contraction, vertigo, Wiry pulse: Liver-
Wind
• 
 
Pronounced contraction and pain, feeling cold,
ameliorated by heat: Cold
• 
 
Contraction of joints with swelling, feeling of
heaviness: Dampness
265
• 
 
Contraction of joints with swelling and bone
deformities: Phlegm
• 
 
Contraction and rigidity of joints with severe pain,
Purple tongue: Blood stasis
Hemiplegia
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Observation
Hemiplegia consists in the unilateral paralysis of the arm or leg, or
both.
Clinical significance
Hemiplegia is seen in the sequelae stage of Wind-stroke and the
main patterns causing it are Liver-Wind and Phlegm. In protracted
cases after a Wind-stroke, Blood stasis may also develop, which
causes pronounced rigidity and pain of the limbs in addition to the
paralysis.
Tremor Of The Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Observation
‘Tremor of the hands’ consists in an involuntary tremor of the
hands or of the whole arm. The tremor may be very pronounced
and with wide amplitude or very slight with a small amplitude. It
may be unilateral or bilateral. The patient has difficulty holding a
book, a spoon or a cup.
Clinical significance
Tremor of the hands always indicates internal Wind. Internal Wind
may, in turn, develop from Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire, Liver-
Blood deficiency or Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency. When it
266
derives from Liver-Yang or Liver-Fire, the Wind is of a Full nature
and the tremor is pronounced; when it derives from Deficiency, the
Wind is of an Empty nature and the tremor is slight. In addition to
the above patterns, in the elderly internal Wind is frequently
complicated by Phlegm.
In alcoholics, a fine tremor of the hands is caused by Phlegm-
Heat. In rare cases, retention of Dampness in the muscles and
sinews of the hands may also cause a fine tremor.
Tremor Of The Feet
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Observation
‘Tremor of the feet’ consists in an involuntary tremor of the feet or
of the whole leg, which may be unilateral 
or bilateral. The patient
has difficulty in walking and there may be atrophy of the lower
limb.
Clinical significance
Tremor of the feet or legs is usually due to internal Wind of the
Empty type, that is, deriving from Liver-Blood deficiency or Liver-
and Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Contraction Of The Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Observation
‘Contraction of the fingers’, which may be unilateral or bilateral,
consists in an involuntary contracture of the fingers and
permanent bending with inability to stretch the hand. The
movement of the muscles and sinews above the wrist is normal.
Clinical significance
Contraction of the fingers is due either to deficiency of Blood or
Yin, or both, or to invasion of Cold in the sinews and muscles, as in
267
Painful Obstruction Syndrome. In the former case, the deficient
Blood fails to nourish the sinews, which, in time, contract from
lack of fluids; in the latter case, external Cold invades the sinews
and muscles of the hands causing them to contract.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:17 First
published c. 100
BC
268
SECTION 2
OBSERVATION
OF PARTS OF
THE BODY
269
 
OBSERVATION
OF PARTS OF THE
BODY
Section contents
5. 
 
Observation of head, face and hair
6. 
 
Observation of the eyes
7. 
 
Observation of the nose
8. 
 
Observation of lips, mouth, palate, teeth, gums and philtrum
9. 
 
Observation of the ears
10. 
 
Observation of the throat and neck
11. 
 
Observation of the back
12. 
 
Observation of women’s breasts
13. 
 
Observation of the heartbeat
14. 
 
Observation of the hands
15. 
 
Observation of the nails
16. 
 
Observation of the chest and abdomen
17. 
 
Observation of the genitalia
18. 
 
Observation of the four limbs
19. 
 
Observation of the legs
20. 
 
Observation of excretions
21. 
 
Observation of the skin
22. 
 
Observation in children
270
INTRODUCTION
This section discusses the observation of individual parts of the
body. 
Section 1
 
dealt with the observation of the body shape,
complexion and mental characteristics. These are the main things
we would observe as the patient walks into our consulting room
and they therefore give us the broad picture of that patient’s
constitution and potential disharmony.
After observing these general traits, we proceed to observing
individual parts of the body, generally starting from the top and
proceeding downwards. Some of these parts are observable as
patients speak to us and some only when they undress and lie on
the couch. Moreover, some of these parts are observed routinely
(e.g. ears, hair, mouth, etc.) and some only if the patient asks us to
(e.g. genitalia and women’s breasts). Observation of the two
excretions has been added here for completion although it is not
carried out under normal clinical circumstances; this might be
carried out if we see patients in their own home for an acute
condition.
It is important to precede observation of individual parts of the
body with the observation of the body shape and demeanour as a
whole as described in the previous section. We should not give
disproportionate importance to an individual part of the body (e.g.
the ears) at the expense of observation of the body shape and
demeanour as a whole. (Observation of the facial colours has been
discussed in 
Chapter 3
 
.)
271
CHAPTER 5
 
OBSERVATION
OF HEAD, FACE
AND HAIR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
HEAD
Dry scalp
Redness and pain of the scalp
Tremor of the head
Swelling of the whole head
Boils on the scalp
Ulcers on the scalp
Ulcers in the mastoid region
Erosion of the scalp
Head leaning to one side
Head tilted backwards
Late closure of the fontanelles
272
FACE
Acne
Papular/macular eruption
Oedema of the face
Swelling and redness of the face
Swelling, redness and pain of the cheeks
Ulcers below the zygomatic arch
Lines on the face
Deviation of eye and mouth
HAIR
Hair falling out
Alopecia
Dry and brittle hair
Greasy hair
Premature greying of the hair
Dandruff
HEAD
In observation of the head, one should first of all make a general
assessment of the patient’s constitution based on the facial
features. A person with a good constitution will generally have a
head with smooth features, a broad forehead and long ears with
thick ear-lobes. A person with a poor constitution will have a head
that is too small or with uneven features and small ears with small
ear-lobes.
The features discussed are as follows:
 
• 
 
dry scalp
• 
 
redness and pain of the scalp
273
• 
 
tremor of the head
• 
 
swelling of the whole head
• 
 
boils on the scalp
• 
 
ulcers on the scalp
• 
 
ulcers in the mastoid region
• 
 
erosion of the scalp
• 
 
head leaning to one side
• 
 
head tilted backwards
• 
 
late closure of the fontanelles.
Dry Scalp
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A dry scalp indicates Liver- or Kidney-Yin deficiency, or both.
Redness And Pain Of The Scalp
Redness and pain of the scalp indicate either an acute invasion of
Wind-Heat or the flaring up of Liver-Fire.
Tremor Of The Head
Observation,
 
Chapter 4
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Tremor of the head indicates internal Liver-Wind and is seen in
Parkinson’s disease in the elderly.
Swelling Of The Whole Head
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A swelling of the face and the whole head with redness of the
eyes is called ‘Big Head Warm Disease’, which is due to Wind-Heat
with Toxic Heat invading the Upper Burner. It is often seen in
parotitis.
Boils On The Scalp
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
274
Boils on the scalp are due to Liver-Fire, Damp-Heat in the Liver
channel, or Toxic Heat.
Ulcers On The Scalp
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Ulcers on the scalp are due to Liver-Fire, Damp-Heat in the Liver
channel, or, if they are in the region of Du-20 Baihui, Heat in the
Governing Vessel.
Ulcers In The Mastoid Region
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Ulcers in the mastoid region are due to Damp-Heat in the Gall-
Bladder channel or to Liver-Fire.
Erosion Of The Scalp
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Erosion of the scalp (when the skin is broken) with itching and
oozing of a fluid is due to Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
Head Leaning To One Side
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
If the head leans to one side and the patient is unable to keep it
straight, this is due to either a deficiency and sinking of Spleen-Qi
or a deficiency of the Sea of Marrow.
Head Tilted Backwards
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
If the head is tilted backwards with eyes rolled up, this indicates
internal Liver-Wind, which is frequently seen in acute febrile
diseases in children.
Late Closure Of The Fontanelles
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
275
In babies, one should observe the fontanelles: late closure of the
fontanelles indicates poor hereditary Kidney constitution. The
posterior fontanelle usually closes about 2 months after birth, the
sphenoid fontanelle closes at about 3 months, the mastoid
fontanelle closes near the end of the first year, and the anterior
fontanelle may not close completely until the middle or end of the
second year.
Box 5.1
 
summarizes the head signs.
 
BOX 5.1
 
   
 
HEAD SIGNS
• 
 
Dry scalp: Liver-/Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Red and painful scalp: Wind-Heat or Liver-Fire
• 
 
Tremor of head: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Swelling of head and face: Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat
(parotitis)
• 
 
Boils on scalp: Liver-Fire, Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat
• 
 
Ulcers on scalp: Liver-Fire, Damp-Heat or Heat in the
Governing Vessel
• 
 
Ulcers in the mastoid region: Damp-Heat in Gall-
Bladder channel or Liver-Fire
• 
 
Erosion of skull with itching and oozing: Damp-Heat
in the Liver channel
• 
 
Head leaning to one side: Spleen-Qi deficiency or
deficiency of Sea of Marrow
• 
 
Head tilted backwards with eyes rolled up: Liver-
Wind
• 
 
Late closure of fontanelles: poor hereditary Kidney
constitution
FACE
The most important aspect of observation of the face is the
complexion colour, which has already been described in 
Chapter 3
. Other diagnostic signs of the face include oedema, swelling,
spots, ulcers and lines.
The following features are discussed:
276
 
• 
 
acne
• 
 
papular/macular eruptions
• 
 
oedema of the face
• 
 
swelling and redness of the face
• 
 
swelling, redness and pain of the cheeks
• 
 
ulcers below the zygomatic arch
• 
 
lines on the face
• 
 
deviation of eye and mouth.
Acne
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 55
 
and 
77
Acne on the face is generally due to Damp-Heat, in chronic
conditions occurring against a background of Qi deficiency. In
severe cases when the pustules are very large and painful, it is due
to Toxic Heat. If the pustules are of a dull-purplish colour, there is
Blood stasis.
Papular/Macular Eruptions
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Papular eruptions on the face and nose indicate Lung-Heat while
macular eruptions indicate Blood-Heat.
Oedema Of The Face
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Acute oedema of the face is due to invasion of the Lungs by
Wind-Water; chronic oedema of the face is due to Spleen- and
Lung-Yang deficiency.
Swelling And Redness Of The Face
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Acute swelling and redness of the face indicate invasion of
Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat such as is seen in infectious febrile
diseases.
277
Swelling, Redness And Pain Of The Cheeks
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Swelling, redness and pain of the cheeks and below the
mandible indicates invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat and it is
usually seen in parotitis.
Ulcers Below The Zygomatic Arch
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Ulcers below the zygomatic arch are due to Toxic Heat in the
Stomach.
Lines On The Face
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
If there are lines on the face and the skin has a very uneven
surface, this indicates Blood deficiency or Heat with Dryness,
usually related to emotional stress.
Deviation Of Eye And Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapter 4
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A deviation of the eye and mouth that does not affect the
eyebrows and forehead is due to internal Wind and is seen in
patients suffering from Wind-stroke. A deviation of the eye and
mouth with an inability to raise one eyebrow and furrowing of the
forehead on one side indicates invasion of external Wind in the
channels of the face and it is seen in Bell’s palsy.
Box 5.2
 
summarizes the face signs.
 
BOX 5.2
 
   
 
FACE SIGNS
• 
 
Acute oedema: invasion of Lungs by Wind-Water
• 
 
Chronic oedema: Lung- and Spleen-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Acute swelling and redness: Wind-Heat with Toxic
Heat
• 
 
Acute swelling, redness and pain below mandible:
Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat (parotitis)
• 
 
Ulcers below zygomatic arch: Toxic Heat in Stomach
• 
 
Papules on face and nose: Lung-Heat (Qi level)
278
• 
 
Macules on face and nose: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Lined face with uneven skin surface: Blood deficiency
or Heat and Dryness
• 
 
Deviation of eye and mouth (not affecting eyebrows
and forehead): facial paralysis from Wind-stroke
• 
 
Deviation of eye and mouth (affecting eyebrows and
forehead): peripheral facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy;
external Wind invasion)
HAIR
The development of the head and hair depends largely on the state
of the Kidneys and Liver. The Kidneys influence the bones, which
determine the structure of the head, and they govern the Marrow,
which 
determines the normal development of the brain. Both
Kidneys and Liver influence the growth of hair and therefore its
normal growth, colour and consistency depend on the Liver and
Kidneys.
The patterns causing each of the hair signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 55
 
.
The following conditions are discussed:
 
• 
 
hair falling out
• 
 
alopecia
• 
 
dry and brittle hair
• 
 
greasy hair
• 
 
premature greying of the hair
• 
 
dandruff.
Hair Falling Out
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
The term ‘falling out’ refers to a gradual loss of hair, or to its slow
279
growth, or to excessively thin hair.
Clinical significance
The growth and the thickness of the hair depend largely on the
state of the Liver and Kidneys and specifically on Liver-Blood and
Kidney-Essence: therefore, a gradual loss of hair may be due to
Liver-Blood deficiency or Kidney-Essence deficiency, or both.
However, there are also Full causes of loss of hair and in particular
Blood-Heat, which causes the hair to fall out by drying out the hair
follicles; this Blood-Heat usually derives from Liver-Fire which
rises up to the head causing the loss of hair.
Loss of hair frequently occurs after a serious disease that is
either acute or chronic and lingering. Of course there may also be
external causes of hair loss and an example of these is the loss
occurring after a course of chemotherapy.
In some cases, baldness can occur in young people. If a young
person shows no sign of Liver or Kidney deficiency and has a
strong body, this means that the baldness is a hereditary trait and
has no clinical significance.
Box 5.3
 
summarizes the causes of falling-out hair.
 
BOX 5.3
 
   
 
HAIR FALLING OUT
• 
 
Liver-Blood/Kidney-Essence deficiency
• 
 
Blood-Heat (from Liver-Fire)
• 
 
Serious, acute disease
• 
 
Chronic, protracted disease
• 
 
Chemotherapy
Alopecia
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
Alopecia refers to the sudden loss of hair, which usually falls out
in clumps.
280
Clinical significance
Alopecia may be due to several factors: first, Blood-Heat (usually
deriving from Liver-Fire) which dries out the hair follicles; or
internal Wind rising to the head; or Blood stasis, when the
stagnant Blood in the head prevents new Blood from nourishing
the hair.
Box 5.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying alopecia.
 
BOX 5.4
 
   
 
ALOPECIA
• 
 
Blood Heat: hair falling out in clumps, dry hair,
feeling of heat, thirst, Red tongue, Rapid pulse
• 
 
Internal Wind: hair falling out in clumps, giddiness,
Wiry pulse
• 
 
Blood stasis: hair falling out in clumps, dark
complexion, Purple tongue
Dry And Brittle Hair
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
The description refers to hair that is dry, brittle and excessively
thin.
Clinical significance
The most common cause of dry and brittle hair is deficiency of
Liver-Blood or Kidney-Yin, or both; as the Liver and Kidneys are
the main organs that nourish the hair, this makes the hair dry, thin
and brittle.
A general deficiency of Qi and Blood, usually involving Liver-
Blood, may also cause the hair to become dry and brittle for the
same reasons indicated above.
A deficiency of Stomach and Spleen may cause the hair to
become excessively thin and brittle when it is 
not nourished by the
Food Essences produced by the Stomach. This condition is often
caused by worry, pensiveness or excessive studying, which
281
weakens the Spleen.
A chronic loss of blood, such as might happen in chronic
menorrhagia, may also cause the hair to become dry and thin
because there is not enough Blood to nourish it.
Box 5.5
 
summarizes the causes of dry and brittle hair.
 
BOX 5.5
 
   
 
DRY AND BRITTLE HAIR
• 
 
Liver-Blood/Kidney-Essence deficiency
• 
 
General Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency
• 
 
Chronic loss of blood
Greasy Hair
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Greasy hair is always a sign of Dampness (with or without Heat)
or Phlegm.
Premature Greying Of The Hair
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
‘Premature greying of the hair’ refers to the hair becoming grey or
white too early in a person’s life; of course, whitening of the hair
with age is normal and does not indicate a pathology.
Clinical significance
The most common cause of premature greying of the hair is
deficiency of Liver-Blood or Kidney-Essence, or both, which fail to
nourish the hair properly. Another cause is a general Qi and Blood
deficiency. Hair turning white suddenly is usually due to Liver- and
Heart-Fire caused by a shock or a very intense emotional upset
such as anger.
Premature greying of the hair in a young person who has a
strong body and is in good health is purely hereditary and has no
282
clinical significance.
Hair turning yellow and dry usually indicates deficiency of Blood
and Essence.
Box 5.6
 
summarizes the causes of premature greying of hair.
 
BOX 5.6
 
   
 
PREMATURE GREYING OF
THE HAIR
• 
 
Liver-Blood/Kidney-Essence deficiency
• 
 
General Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Liver- and Heart-Fire
• 
 
Hereditary
Dandruff
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Observation
Dandruff consists in small, white, dry scales which slough off the
scalp.
Clinical significance
The most common cause of dandruff is Liver-Blood that is
deficient and fails to nourish the scalp. If the production of
dandruff is profuse and it comes in bouts, it is due to Liver-Wind
usually stemming from Liver-Blood deficiency.
Dandruff may also be due to Heat conditions; in particular
Liver-Fire, Damp-Heat in the Liver affecting the head, or Toxic
Heat.
For a more detailed description of the patterns involved in
dandruff see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 55
 
.
Box 5.7
 
summarizes the causes of dandruff.
 
BOX 5.7
 
   
 
DANDRUFF
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Liver-Wind
• 
 
Liver-Fire
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Liver
283
• 
 
Toxic Heat
284
CHAPTER 6
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE EYES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EYES
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE INTERNAL ORGANS AND THE
EYES
The eyes and the Liver
The eyes and the Kidneys
The eyes and the Heart
The eyes and the Stomach and Spleen
The eyes and the Gall-Bladder
The eyes and the Bladder
The eyes and the Small Intestine
The Five Wheels
The Eight Ramparts
The Eye System
ASPECTS OF OBSERVATION OF THE EYES
285
The lustre of the eyes
The control of the eyes
The normal eye
OBSERVATION OF PATHOLOGICAL SIGNS OF THE EYE
Abnormal colour
Other features
INTRODUCTION
From a Five-Element perspective, the eyes are the outlet of the
Liver. 
Chapter 4
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘The East direction
corresponds to the colour green and the Liver which opens into the
orifice of the eyes.’
 
1
 
However, many other organs influence the
eyes and, particularly from a diagnostic point of view, the eyes
reflect the state of all the Internal Organs and therefore of the
Mind and Spirit. In particular, the eyes reflect the state of the Mind
and Spirit because of the close connection between the Eyes and
the Heart. In fact, 
Chapter 81
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘The
Heart transports the Essence of the five Yin organs to the eyes; if the
eyes are brilliant and with lustre, it shows that the person is happy
and Qi is harmonious. If, on the contrary, the eyes lack lustre it
indicates that the person is afflicted by worry and this is reflected
in the brilliance of the eyes.’
 
2
 
The same chapter says: 
‘The Spirit
and the Essence of the Heart gather in the eyes.’
 
3
However, as mentioned above, many other organs also influence
the eyes. 
Chapter 4
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘Qi and Blood of the
twelve channels and of the fifteen Connecting channels reach the
orifices of the face so that the Yang-Qi brightens the eyes’.
 
4
 
Chapter
71
 
of the same book says: 
‘By observing the five colours of the eyes,
one can determine the state of the five Yin organs and therefore the
prognosis.’
 
5
Therefore, as we can see, the essences and fluids of all the
Internal Organs nourish and moisten the eyes: for this reason, the
eyes can reflect the state of most Internal Organs and not just the
286
Liver, to which they are related within the Five-Element scheme of
correspondences. The ‘Spiritual Axis’ in 
Chapter 80
 
says:
The Essence of the five Yin and six Yang organs all reach the
eyes which are the ‘nest’ of the Essence. The Essence of the
bones [and therefore of the Kidneys] manifests in the pupil; the
Essence of the sinews [and therefore of the Liver] manifests in
the iris; the Essence of Blood [and therefore of the Heart]
manifests in the blood vessels and the canthus [of the eye]; the
Essence of Qi [and therefore of the Lungs] manifests on the
sclera; the Essence of the muscles [and therefore of the Spleen]
manifests in the eyelids; therefore, the Essence of bones, sinews,
blood and Qi together with the blood vessels form the Eye
System which goes upwards entering the brain and backwards
exiting at the nape of the neck.
 
6
This statement from the ‘Spiritual Axis’ is important in two
ways. First, it establishes a connection between the Internal
Organs and the five parts of the eye that are called the Five
Wheels. The Five Wheels are the pupil (corresponding to the
Kidneys), the iris (corresponding to the Liver), the sclera
(corresponding to the Lungs), the two corners of the sclera
(corresponding to the Heart) and the eyelids (corresponding to the
Spleen). Secondly, this chapter of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ describes an
‘Eye System’ composed of all the channels reaching the eye which
enter the brain and exit at the nape of the neck.
The same chapter of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ also says:
The eyes manifest the Essence of the five Yin and six Yang
organs, the Nutritive and Defensive Qi, and they are the place
where the Qi of the Mind is generated … the eyes are the
messengers of the Heart which houses the Mind. If the Mind
and Essence are not co-ordinated and not transmitted one has
visual hallucinations. The Mind, Ethereal Soul and Corporeal
Soul are scattered so that one has bewildering perceptions.
 
7
In conclusion, in diagnosis the eyes reflect the state of all the
287
organs and of the Mind and Spirit.
 
Remember
 
: the eyes reflect the state of 
all
 
the organs,
and of the Mind and Spirit.
The discussion of observation of the eyes will first of all look at
the channels influencing the eyes and the various physiological
relationships between the eyes and various organs. After
discussing the physiological relationships between the Internal
Organs and the eye, we shall discuss the particular aspects of the
eyes that should be observed in clinical practice.
The various pathological colours of the sclera will be discussed
and, finally, various other signs appearing in the eyes will be
discussed. (Please note that many more signs related to the eyes
are discussed in 
Part 5
 
Symptoms and Signs, 
Chapter 61
 
.)
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EYES
The channels coursing through or around the eyes are illustrated
in 
Figure 6.1
 
. The pathways of the channels coursing through or
around the eyes are as follows:
288
FIG. 6.1
 
Channels coursing through the eyes
 
• 
 
The Stomach Main channel goes to the eye and
connects with BL-1 Jingming.
• 
 
The Stomach Muscle channel connects with muscles
around the orbit and with the Bladder Muscle channel.
• 
 
The Stomach Divergent channel goes to the forehead
and down to enter the eye.
• 
 
The Heart Main, Connecting and Divergent channels
all flow to the eye.
• 
 
The Bladder Main channel goes to the inner corner of
the eye.
• 
 
The Bladder Muscle channel binds around the orbit.
• 
 
The Liver Main channel goes through the eye on its
way to the vertex.
• 
 
The Gall-Bladder Main and Muscle channels go to the
289
outer corner of the eye.
• 
 
The Directing and Penetrating Vessels go to the lower
orbit of the eye (not shown in 
Fig. 6.1
 
).
• 
 
The Yin and Yang Heel Vessels go to BL-1 Jingming
(not shown in 
Fig. 6.1
 
).
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
INTERNAL ORGANS AND THE EYES
The Eyes And The Liver
The relationship between the eyes and the Liver is, of course, very
well known owing to the Five-Element correspondence. The Liver-
Blood nourishes the eyes and produces normal vision. For
example, the ‘Spiritual Axis’ in 
Chapter 17
 
says: ‘
 
Liver-Qi reaches
the eyes, when the Liver is harmonized the eyes can distinguish the
five colours.
 
’
 
8
 
It also says: ‘
 
The Liver stores Blood which allows us
to see.
 
’
 
9
 
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 5
 
says: 
‘
The Liver
governs the eyes
 
;’
 
10
 
and in 
Chapter 4
 
: 
‘
The East corresponds to the
green colour and the Liver which opens into the eyes.
 
’
 
11
Liver-Yin also nourishes the eyes and, more specifically, it
moistens them: in fact, dry eyes are often a symptom of Liver-Yin
deficiency, while blurred vision is a symptom of Liver-Blood
deficiency.
The Eyes And The Kidneys
Like Liver-Blood, the Kidneys nourish the eyes; they also moisten
the eyes and control the normal fluids that lubricate them. Many
eye problems, especially in the elderly, are due to Kidney-Yin
deficiency. The Kidneys also influence the intraocular pressure and
glaucoma is often due to a Kidney deficiency.
The Eyes And The Heart
The Heart Main channel reaches the eye internally, the Heart
290
Connecting channel also reaches the eye, and the Heart Divergent
channel connects with the Small Intestine channel at the inner
canthus of the eyes.
The ‘Spiritual Axis’ in 
Chapter 10
 
says: 
‘
The Heart channel
connects with the Eye System
 
.’
 
12
 
In 
Chapter 11
 
it says: 
‘
The
Divergent channel of the Heart connects with the Eye System.
 
’
 
13
The same chapter also says: 
‘
The Heart channel reaches the face
and connects with the inner canthus of the eye
 
.’
 
14
Therefore, Heart-Blood also nourishes the eye in a similar way to
Liver-Blood, or, to put it differently, for Blood to reach the eye it
needs the transporting action of Heart-Qi. The ‘Simple Questions’
also mentions the connection between the eye and the Heart in
several places and 
Chapter 81
 
says: 
‘
The Spirit and the Essence of
the Heart gather in the eye.
 
’
 
15
 
It also says: 
‘
The Heart is the focus of
the Essence of the five Yin organs and its orifice is the eye
 
.’
 
16
 
The
‘Spiritual Axis’ in 
Chapter 80
 
says: 
‘
The eye is the ambassador of
the Heart.
 
’
 
17
The significance of all the above statements is twofold. First, like
the Liver, the Heart nourishes the eye and therefore many eye
problems are related to a Heart pathology. Secondly, the Essence of
the Heart, and therefore the Mind and Spirit, manifests in the eyes:
this is an extremely important aspect of diagnosis as a careful
observation of the eyes reveals the state of the Mind and Spirit.
The Eyes And The Stomach And Spleen
The Stomach channel is closely connected to the eye as it starts
just under the orbit of the eye. It transports the Food Essences to
the eyes. The Spleen influences the eyelids and the muscles that
control their opening and closing. 
Chapter 62
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’
says: 
‘
Stomach-Qi flows upwards to the Lungs and on to the head
via the throat and connects with the Eye System and from here
enters the brain.
 
’
 
18
 
Chapter 31
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The
Bright Yang controls the muscles and its channel flows to the nose
and eyes
 
.’
 
19
 
Chapter 21
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The leg Bright
Yang channel goes to the nose, the mouth and enters the Eye System
.’
 
20
 
Both the Divergent and the Muscle channels of the Stomach
enter the eye. 
Chapter 13
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The Muscle
291
channel of the Stomach … connects with the Greater Yang channel
which controls the upper eyelid, while the Bright Yang channel
controls the lower eyelid.
 
’
 
21
 
However, the prevalent view is that the
Spleen controls both eyelids.
The Eyes And The Gall-Bladder
The Gall-Bladder channel is closely connected to the eye as it starts
at its outer corner. 
Chapter 10
 
of the 
‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The
Gall-Bladder channel starts from the lateral corner of the eye.
 
’
 
22
Chapter 11
 
of the same book says: 
‘
The Gall-Bladder Divergent
channel … scatters on the face, enters the Eye System and joins the
Main channel at the external corner of the eye.
 
’
 
23
 
Chapter 13
 
says:
‘
The Muscle channel of the Gall-Bladder … binds around the
external corner of the eye.
 
’
 
24
 
Thus, both the Divergent and the
Muscle channel of the Gall-Bladder reach the eye.
The Eyes And The Bladder
The Bladder channel starts at the inner corner of the eye. Its
influence on the eye is a close one. 
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’ says: 
‘
The Bladder channel starts at the inner corner of the eye.
’
 
25
 
The Bladder Muscle channel is wrapped around the eye socket.
Chapter 21
 
of the same book says: 
‘
The leg Greater Yang channel
penetrates the occiput, enters the brain, it connects with the eye
and is called the Eye System.
 
’
 
26
The Eyes And The Small Intestine
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
A branch of the Small
Intestine channel departing from the clavicle, goes to the neck and
cheek to reach the lateral corner of the eye … another branch
reaches the nose and arrives at the inner corner of the eye.
 
’
 
27
 
The
Muscle channel of the Small Intestine also reaches the outer
corner of the eye.
 
Remember
 
: the Liver is 
not
 
the only organ that
influences the eyes.
292
Box 6.1
 
and 
Figure 6.2
 
summarizes the relationships between the
Internal Organs and the eyes.
 
BOX 6.1
 
   
 
THE EYES AND INTERNAL
ORGANS
• 
 
Liver: Liver-Blood nourishes the eyes; Liver-Yin
nourishes and moisturizes the eyes
• 
 
Kidneys: Kidney-Yin nourishes and moistens the eyes
• 
 
Heart: Heart-Blood nourishes the eyes; Heart-Qi
transports Qi and Blood to the eyes
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen: Stomach transports food
essences to the eyes: Stomach’s Main, Muscle and
Divergent channels reach the eyes; the Spleen controls
the eyelids
• 
 
Gall-Bladder: the Gall-Bladder’s Main, Divergent and
Muscle channels reach the outer corner of the eyes; GB-1
connects with the Eye system
• 
 
Bladder: the Bladder’s Main and Muscle channels
reach the eyes; BL-1 connects with the Eye System
• 
 
Small Intestine: the Small Intestine’s Main and
Muscle channels reach the eyes
FIG. 6.2
 
Relationship of Internal Organs with the eyes
293
The Five Wheels
The ‘Five Wheels’ is an ancient expression to indicate five areas of
the eyes: the pupil, iris, corners of the sclera, the rest of the sclera
and the eyelids. These Five Wheels are the Water Wheel, the Wind
Wheel, the Blood Wheel, the Qi Wheel and the Muscle Wheel
respectively. 
Figure 6.3
 
illustrates the Five Wheels.
FIG. 6.3
 
The Five Wheels of the eye
The Five Wheels are as follows:
 
• 
 
The Wind Wheel is the iris; it is the essence of the
sinews and pertains to the Liver.
• 
 
The Blood Wheel is the corners of the sclera of the
eyes; it is the essence of the Blood and pertains to the
Heart.
• 
 
The Qi Wheel is the rest of the sclera; it is the essence
of Qi and pertains to the Lungs.
• 
 
The Muscle Wheel is the eyelids; it is the essence of
the muscles and pertains to the Stomach and Spleen.
• 
 
The Water Wheel is the pupil, it is the essence of the
bones and pertains to the Kidneys.
The significance of the Five Wheels is that it establishes a
physiological relationship between those five parts of the eye and
the Internal Organs. For example, the pupil pertains to the
Kidneys and if it is excessively dilated it may indicate Kidney-Yang
deficiency; the iris pertains to the Liver and its inflammation may
294
indicate Liver-Heat; the sclera pertains to the Lungs and a 
change
in its colour or texture may indicate a Lung pathology such as
Lung-Heat; the corners of the eye pertain to the Heart and a
redness there may indicate Heart-Fire; the eyelids pertain to the
Stomach and Spleen and if, for example, they are drooping this
may indicate sinking of Spleen-Qi, while if they are swollen and
red they indicate Spleen-Heat. However, as always in the Chinese
medicine system of correspondences, there are pathologies which
escape such correspondences; for example, a redness of the sclera
may be related to Heat in any organ and not just the Lungs.
The Eight Ramparts
The ‘Eight Ramparts’ are another way of classifying areas of the
eye in relation to the Internal Organs. The classification according
to the Eight Ramparts is broadly the same as that according to the
Five Wheels, except that it is more detailed, especially in relation
to the sclera, which is divided into three areas corresponding to
the Lungs, Minister Fire and Triple Burner. (
Fig. 6.4
 
).
FIG. 6.4
 
The Eight Ramparts of the eye
The Eight Ramparts are:
 
• 
 
Heaven Rampart corresponding to the sclera and
pertaining to the Lungs and Large Intestine
• 
 
Earth Rampart corresponding to the eyelids and
pertaining to the Stomach and Spleen
295
• 
 
Fire Rampart corresponding to the corners of the eye
and pertaining to the Heart and Small Intestine
• 
 
Water Rampart corresponding to the pupil and
pertaining to the Kidneys
• 
 
Wind Rampart corresponding to the iris and
pertaining to the Liver and Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Thunder Rampart corresponding to the upper part of
the outer sclera and pertaining to the Minister Fire
• 
 
Mountain Rampart corresponding to the outer corner
and pertaining to the Pericardium
• 
 
Pool Rampart corresponding to the lower part of the
inner sclera and pertaining to the Triple Burner.
The Eye System
Chapter 80
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ mentions the Eye System (
Fig. 6.5
):
FIG. 6.5
 
The Eye System
296
The Essences of the five Yin and six Yang organs all reach the
eyes which are the ‘nest’ of the Essences. The Essence of the
bones [and therefore of the Kidneys] manifests in the pupil; the
Essence of the sinews [and therefore of the Liver] manifests in
the iris; the Essence of Blood [and therefore of the Heart]
manifests in the blood vessels and the canthus [of the eye]; the
Essence of Qi [and therefore of the Lungs] manifests on the
sclera; the Essence of the muscles [and therefore of the Spleen]
manifests in the eyelids; therefore, the Essences of bones,
sinews, blood and Qi together with blood vessels [or channels]
form the Eye System which goes upwards entering the brain
and backwards exiting at the nape of the neck. Therefore, when
pathogenic factors enter the occiput due to a deficiency
condition of the body, they penetrate this pathway to the Eye
System into the brain. This causes the brain to feel like
‘turning’ which causes a tightness of the Eye System; a
tightness of the Eye System will cause the vision to be
obfuscated and there is dizziness.
 
28
The ‘Eye System’ is, therefore, the complex of channels,
Connecting channels and blood vessels converging at the eyes and
gathering the Qi and Essence of all organs, entering the brain and
then exiting at the occiput. The Eye System essentially highlights
the physiological relationship between the Internal Organs,
together with their channels and blood vessels, the eyes and the
brain. Modern Chinese texts often translate ‘Eye System’ as ‘optic
nerve’; this is, in my opinion, a reductionist view: although the Eye
System is related to the optic nerve, it is not the same structure (in
the same way that channels are related to, but are not the same as,
the nerves running alongside them).
From an acupuncture perspective, many of the points around
the eye socket have an influence on the brain and therefore the
Mind.
 
Remember
 
: many of the points around the eye socket
have an influence on the brain and therefore the Mind
through the Eye System.
297
ASPECTS OF OBSERVATION OF THE
EYES
The Lustre Of The Eyes
The lustre (
shen
 
) of the eyes refers to the brilliance, vitality, glitter
and sparkle of the eyes, all of which reflect a normal state of the
Mind and Spirit and therefore, in particular, of the Heart. However,
as indicated above, the Essence of the other Internal Organs also
manifests in the eyes.
A good, normal lustre of the eyes indicates that, whatever the
illness a person may be suffering from, the Mind and Spirit are
still strong and that person’s emotional and mental life is balanced
and well integrated. This lustre is an extremely important sign and
when present always points to a good prognosis. The normal lustre
of the eyes is somewhat ‘moist’, that is, the eye looks well
lubricated and not dry. However, the eye should not be too wet
either.
 
29
 
As soon as a new patient sits down, I study first, and
carefully, the lustre of the eyes.
When the Mind and Spirit are affected by long-standing
emotional problems, the eyes may lose their lustre and become
somewhat dull and lacking sparkle (see 
Plate 6.1 on p. P8
 
). The
degree of dullness of the eyes reflects the severity and duration of
the emotional problems accurately: the duller the eyes, the more
severe and long standing the emotional problems. In a few cases,
however, the eyes can become dull and lose lustre from physical
causes such as a serious disease or from a long course of
chemotherapy. Barring the last cause of lack of eye lustre, I find
this sign never to fail: even if a person tries hard to hide his or her
emotional problems, lack of lustre of the eyes always tells the
truth.
The ‘Great Treatise of Ophthalmology’ (
Yan Ke Da Quan,
 
1644)
relates the lustre of the eyes in particular to the Fire of the Gate of
Life (
Ming Men
 
): 
‘
The brightness of the Mind manifests with
brilliance of the eyes. The brightness of the Mind has its origin in
the Gate of Life (Ming Men) and it emerges to the Heart through the
Gall-Bladder: therefore it is a manifestation of Fire.
 
’
 
30
298
The Control Of The Eyes
‘Control’ of the eyes refers to the movement or lack of movement
of the eyeballs. Someone who has ‘controlled’ eyes is able to fix the
gaze, the person will be able to look directly at other people and
engage their gaze; the eyes do not move too much nor are they too
fixed, they look stable and at ease. Uncontrolled eyes may manifest
either with a fixed stare or with a shifty glance with excessive
movement of the eyeballs; a person whose eyes are uncontrolled
frequently looks down or away to avoid engaging another person’s
gaze.
The control of the eyes is quite separate from their lustre and
one should not be surprised to see people 
whose eyes appear to
have lustre but lack control. Lack of control of the eyes indicates
obstruction of the Mind’s orifices and a troubled personality.
The Normal Eye
The normal eye is characterized by clear vision, a clear white sclera
with a distinct border between sclera and iris, normal lustre,
normal control, a bright appearance and normal moisture. The
eyelids should not be swollen or red and should open and close
normally; the inner corner should be pale red, moist and free from
ulcers, sores or gum (sticky secretion collecting in the corner of the
eye); the eye in general should be bright and have lustre and
control indicating a good state of the Mind and Spirit; the eyeball
should move normally, neither darting involuntarily nor staring
fixedly; the sclera should have no spots, nebula or visible blood
vessels.
The patterns causing each of the eye signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 61
 
.
OBSERVATION OF PATHOLOGICAL
SIGNS OF THE EYE
Abnormal Colour
The pathological colours of the eyes should be observed in the
299
sclera. 
Chapter 72
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ relates the five
pathological colours of the sclera to the five Yin organs: 
‘
Red eyes
indicate disease of the Heart, white of the Lungs, green of the Liver,
yellow of the Spleen and black of the Kidneys
 
.’
 
31
Generally speaking, a yellow or red colour indicates Heat while a
greenish or pale colour indicates Cold, and a bright colour
indicates disease in the Yang while a turbid colour indicates
disease in the Yin.
Yellow
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The most common cause of a yellow sclera is Damp-Heat. If
Heat predominates, the sclera is a light and shiny yellow like
tangerine peel; if Dampness predominates, the sclera is a dull
yellow.
Cold-Dampness may also cause the sclera to become yellow, in
which case it will be a dark and dull yellow.
Toxic Heat may cause the sclera to become deep yellow and
bloodshot. Blood deficiency may also cause the sclera to become
yellow but in this case it would be a pale, light yellow.
Finally, Blood stasis may cause the sclera to be very dark yellow,
almost brown.
Box 6.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a yellow sclera.
 
BOX 6.2
 
   
 
YELLOW SCLERA
• 
 
Damp-Heat: bright-yellow or dark-yellow sclera,
feeling of heaviness, gum in the eyes, sticky-yellow
tongue coating
• 
 
Cold-Dampness: dark, dull-yellow sclera, feeling of
heaviness, cold limbs, abdominal pain
• 
 
Toxic Heat: deep-yellow and bloodshot sclera, gum in
the eyes, Red tongue with red points
• 
 
Blood deficiency: pale-yellow sclera, dizziness,
blurred vision, Choppy pulse
• 
 
Blood stasis: dark-yellow sclera, pain in the eye,
Purple tongue
300
Red
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The red colour can be observed either in the sclera or at the
corners of the eyes. A redness of the sclera indicates Heat, which
may derive from any of the Internal Organs but the three most
common ones are Heart-Fire, Liver-Fire and Lung-Heat.
Liver-Fire is probably the most common cause of a red sclera, in
which case it may also be bloodshot and painful. Heart-Fire may
also cause a red sclera, particularly in the two corners. Lung-Heat
may cause a red sclera and this is especially seen in acute
conditions of Lung-Heat or Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs occurring
after an invasion of Wind. Heat in the Bladder may also sometimes
cause a red sclera.
Apart from the conditions of Full-Heat listed above, Empty-Heat
may also cause the sclera to become red in which case it would be
pale red, or it might show thin, red blood vessels.
Box 6.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a red sclera.
 
BOX 6.3
 
   
 
RED SCLERA
• 
 
Liver-Fire: bloodshot sclera, pain in the eye, bitter
taste, Wiry-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: red corners of the eyes, pain in the eye,
palpitations, Red tip of the tongue
• 
 
Lung-Heat: cough, feeling of heat
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs: cough with expectoration
of yellow sputum, feeling of oppression of the chest,
Swollen tongue
• 
 
Heat in the Bladder: burning on urination, difficult
urination
• 
 
Empty-Heat: pale-red sclera, thin, red blood vessels,
night sweating, feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating
Bluish-Greenish
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
Liver-Wind may cause the sclera to become greenish, while
301
internal Cold may cause it to become bluish. In some cases, severe,
chronic deficiency of Kidney-Yin may cause the sclera to become
dull greenish.
Box 6.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a bluish-greenish
sclera.
 
BOX 6.4
 
   
 
BLUISH-GREENISH SCLERA
• 
 
Liver-Wind: greenish sclera, giddiness, tremor, Wiry
pulse
• 
 
Internal Cold: bluish sclera, cold limbs, abdominal
pain, Tight pulse
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: dull greenish sclera, dizziness,
tinnitus, Floating-Empty pulse
Dark
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The most common cause of dark sclera is severe Full-Heat or
Fire, which, as indicated above, may occur in many organs but
especially Liver, Heart and Lungs. In such cases, the dark sclera
can be considered as a further stage of red sclera.
Phlegm is also a common cause of dark sclera, in which case it is
brownish and the eye sockets may also have a brown colour
underneath the eyes. A chronic, severe deficiency of Liver- and
Kidney-Yin may also cause the sclera to become dark.
A dull-dark appearance of the sclera may also be due to severe
deficiency and dryness of Blood.
Box 6.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a dark sclera.
 
BOX 6.5
 
   
 
DARK SCLERA
• 
 
Liver-Fire: pain in the eye, bitter taste, headache, Red
tongue with redder sides
• 
 
Heart-Fire: pain in the eye, palpitations, anxiety, Red
tongue with redder tip
• 
 
Lung-Heat: cough, feeling of heat
• 
 
Phlegm: brownish-dark sclera, dull-white specks, dark
sockets, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: dizziness, tinnitus,
302
night sweating, Floating-Empty pulse
• 
 
Deficiency and dryness of Blood: dull, dark sclera
Other Features
White specks
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
White specks may occur on the sclera or pupil. The most
common cause of white specks is Phlegm, in which case they are
often on the sclera and partially on the pupil. Severe, chronic
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency in the elderly may also cause dull-
white specks on the sclera. Bright-white specks on the sclera are
usually due to chronic Yang deficiency with internal Cold.
Box 6.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying white spectra in the
eye.
 
BOX 6.6
 
   
 
WHITE SPECKS
• 
 
Phlegm: white specks on sclera and pupil, blurred
vision, sputum in the throat, feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: dull-white specks on
sclera, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, Floating-
Empty pulse
• 
 
Yang deficiency: bright-white specks, feeling of cold,
loose stools, Deep-Weak pulse
Protruding eyeball
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
One of the most common causes of protruding eyeball is in the
Liver channel and this may manifest with many different Liver
patterns such as Liver-Fire, Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm,
Liver-Wind, Liver-Wind with Phlegm-Heat, Liver-Qi stagnation,
Liver-Qi and Blood stagnation. Fire may also cause the eyeball to
protrude and the two most common patterns causing this sign are
303
Heart-Fire and Toxic Heat.
Deficiency may also cause the eyeball to protrude slightly, and
especially a Kidney deficiency or a deficiency of Qi and Blood.
Finally, the eyeball may protrude in chronic conditions of cough
and asthma with rebellious Lung-Qi.
(For a detailed list and description of these patterns, see 
Chapter
61
 
in 
Part 5
 
.)
Sunken eyeball
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
Sunken eyeball is always due to Deficiency, which may be a
chronic deficiency of Qi or a sudden deficiency of 
Spleen-Qi
induced by food poisoning. Another cause of sunken eyeball is
collapse of Yin or Yang.
Box 6.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying protruding eyeball.
 
BOX 6.7
 
   
 
PROTRUDING EYEBALL
• 
 
Liver-Fire: red, hot and painful eye, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder sides
• 
 
Heart-Fire: red and painful eye, anxiety, insomnia,
palpitations, Red tongue with redder tip
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm: feeling of distension
of the eye, irritability, feeling of oppression of the chest,
Swollen tongue, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Liver-Wind: giddiness, tremor, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Liver-Wind with Phlegm-Heat: giddiness, tremor,
feeling of oppression of the chest, phlegm in the throat,
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: feeling of distension of the eye,
streaming eyes, irritability, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis: feeling of distension
and pain of the eye, irritability, Purple tongue
• 
 
Toxic Heat: red sclera, gum in the eye, red and painful
eye, fever, Red tongue with red points
• 
 
Deficiency of Kidney Yin and Yang: slightly
protruding eyeball, dizziness, tinnitus, backache
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency: slightly protruding eyeball,
tiredness, palpitations, poor appetite, loose stools
304
• 
 
Rebellious Lung-Qi: chronic cough or asthma
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat: fever, aversion to cold, pain
and itchiness in the eye, Floating-Rapid pulse
Strabismus
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The most common cause of strabismus in children is a
deficiency of Kidney-Essence. In adults, the two most common
patterns of strabismus are Liver-Wind or Liver-Yang rising. Other
patterns which may cause strabismus include a chronic, severe
deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Liver, internal Cold, Blood stasis,
Toxic Heat and Phlegm. (For a detailed list and description of
symptoms of these patterns, see 
Chapter 61
 
.)
Box 6.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying strabismus.
 
BOX 6.8
 
   
 
STRABISMUS
• 
 
Kidney-Essence deficiency: strabismus from early
childhood
• 
 
Liver-Wind: giddiness, tremor, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: dizziness, tinnitus, headache, Wiry
pulse
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Liver:
exhaustion, blurred vision, dizziness, Choppy pulse
• 
 
Internal Cold: feeling of cold, cold limbs, Tight-Slow
pulse
• 
 
Blood stasis: headache, mental restlessness, Purple
tongue
• 
 
Toxic Heat: fever, gum in the eyes, Red tongue with
red points
• 
 
Phlegm: dizziness, nausea, muzziness of the head,
blurred vision, Swollen tongue
Staring, fixed eyes
305
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
‘Staring, fixed eyes’ describes a condition in which the eyes are
wide open and the pupils are staring and not moving.
Heart-Fire and Phlegm-Heat in the Heart are the two most
common patterns causing staring and fixed eyes. In both cases,
this symptom always indicates a disturbance of the Mind and
Spirit with obfuscation of the Mind’s orifices.
Abnormal colour of the eyelids
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
Both eyelids reflect the state of the Spleen; the lower eyelid also
reflects the state of the Stomach. Redness and swelling of the
upper eyelid indicates Spleen-Heat, whereas redness and swelling
of the lower eyelid indicates Stomach-Heat. If both eyelids are red,
this usually indicates Damp-Heat in the Spleen. Redness of the
eyelids with acute onset may be due to invasion of Wind-Heat. A
redness inside the lower eyelid indicates Full-Heat; a thin, red line
inside the lower eyelid indicates Empty-Heat. A redness of the
eyelids like 
cinnabar with small water blisters indicates Damp-
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen. Red, itchy and hot eyelids with
watery eyes are due to Wind, Heat, Dampness or Heart-Fire.
Dark eyelids indicate Kidney deficiency; greyish, dull, sooty
eyelids indicate Cold-Phlegm; dark, red and swollen eyelids
indicate Phlegm-Heat; dark eyelids with a dull-yellow complexion
may indicate Wind-Phlegm; green eyelids indicate Stomach-Cold.
A pale colour inside the eyelids indicates either Blood or Yang
deficiency, whereas a pale colour surrounded by yellow inside the
eyelids indicates retention of food.
Box 6.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal eyelid
colour.
 
BOX 6.9
 
   
 
ABNORMAL EYELID
COLOURS
• 
 
Red and swollen upper lid: Spleen-Heat
• 
 
Red and swollen lower lid: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Both lids red: Damp-Heat in Spleen
• 
 
Red lids with acute onset: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Redness inside lower lids: Full-Heat
306
• 
 
Thin, red line inside lower lids: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Red lids like cinnabar with small water blisters:
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Red, itchy and hot lids with watery eyes: Wind, Heat,
Dampness or Heart-Fire
• 
 
Dark lids: Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Greyish, dull, sooty lids: Cold-Phlegm
• 
 
Dark, red, swollen lids: Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Dark lids with dull-yellow complexion: Wind-Phlegm
• 
 
Green lids: Stomach-Cold
• 
 
Pale colour inside lids: Blood or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Pale colour surrounded by yellow inside the lids:
retention of food
Swollen eyelids
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
A swelling of the eyelids can derive either from Heat or from
Cold. When it derives from Heat it could be due to invasion of
external Wind-Heat or to Spleen Damp-Heat (as the Spleen
controls the eyelids). A gradual swelling of the eyelids is usually
due either to Water overflowing with oedema or to Cold-
Dampness. A description of the patterns causing swelling of the
eyelid can be found in 
Chapter 61
 
.
Box 6.10
 
summarizes the patterns underlying swollen eyelids.
 
BOX 6.10
 
   
 
SWOLLEN EYELIDS
• 
 
Red and swollen lids: Damp-Heat in Spleen
• 
 
Pale and swollen lids: Cold-Dampness in Spleen
• 
 
Acute swelling of lids: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Gradual swelling of lids: Water overflowing or Cold-
Phlegm
Streaming eyes
307
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
There are traditionally two types of streaming eyes: one is called
‘
liu lei
 
’, which indicates runny and streaming eyes and is
described here; the other is ‘
yan chi
 
’, which indicates a thick
discharge and is described under ‘Discharge from the eyes’.
The most common cause of streaming eyes lies in the Liver
channel: many different Liver patterns can cause this symptom,
among them Liver-Blood deficiency, Liver-Heat, Liver-Fire and
Liver-Yin deficiency. The Heart channel also reaches the eye and
Heart-Fire may cause streaming eyes. The Kidneys control the
fluids in the eyes and a deficiency of this organ, whether of Yin or
of Yang, may also cause streaming eyes. Finally, invasions of
external Wind may cause streaming eyes with a sudden onset. (For
a detailed description of the patterns causing streaming eyes, see
Chapter 61
 
.)
Box 6.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying streaming eyes.
 
BOX 6.11
 
   
 
STREAMING EYES
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: mildly streaming eyes when
exposed to wind
• 
 
Liver-Heat (Fire): profusely streaming eyes
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency: mildly streaming eyes in the
evening
• 
 
Heart-Fire: streaming eyes when upset
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: streaming eyes, worse when tired
• 
 
External Wind: streaming eyes with sudden onset
Discharge from the eyes
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
‘Discharge from the eyes’ indicates a relatively thick, sticky
discharge, different from that of streaming eyes, which is
characterized by excessive tears. The most common cause of a
discharge from the eyes is Heat (Fire), especially in the Liver or
Heart, or Empty-Heat, especially of the Liver, Heart or Lungs.
Invasion of external Wind-Heat may also cause a discharge from
the eyes. (For a detailed description of patterns causing a
308
discharge from the eyes, see 
Chapter 61
 
.)
Box 6.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying eye discharges.
 
BOX 6.12
 
   
 
DISCHARGE FROM THE
EYES
• 
 
Liver-Fire: sticky yellow discharge
• 
 
Heart-Fire: sticky yellow discharge, worse when upset
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: sticky
discharge in the evening
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: sticky
discharge in the evening
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: sticky
discharge with cough
• 
 
Wind-Heat: sticky discharge with acute onset
Abnormal colours of the corners of the eyes
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The inner corners of the eyes are called ‘large corners’ in
Chinese medicine, while the outer corners are called ‘small
corners’. Many different channels reach the corners of the eyes
(
Table 6.1
 
).
Table 6.1
Relationship between channels and corners of the eyes
 
Inner corner
Outer corner
Heart
Main channel
Main channel
Small Intestine
Main channel
Muscle channel
Gall-Bladder
 
Main and Muscle channel
Bladder
Main channel
 
Triple Burner
 
Main and Muscle channel
Yin and Yang
Yin and Yang Heel
 
Heel Vessels
Vessels
 
A redness of the corners of the eyes always indicates Heat, which
may be external or internal and Full or Empty. Invasion of external
Wind-Heat may cause a redness of the corners of the eyes. Full-
Heat of various organs can cause a redness of the corners of the
eyes: Lung-Heat usually causes a redness of the inner corner,
309
Heart-Heat (Fire) a redness of the outer corner and Liver-Fire a
redness of either corner.
Empty-Heat deriving from Yin deficiency may cause a redness
and dryness of either corner of the eye; this may be due to Yin
deficiency of various organs and especially Lungs, Heart, Liver and
Kidneys.
Damp-Heat may also cause a redness of either corner, usually
together with a sticky yellow discharge of the eye.
Redness starting from the inner corners of the eyes and
extending towards the centre indicates a pathology of the Yin and
Yang Heel vessels (Yin and Yang Qiao Mai). (For a description of
the patterns causing red corners of the eyes, see 
Chapter 61
 
.)
Pale corners of the eye is due to either Blood deficiency (of the
Liver or Heart) or Yang deficiency (of the Spleen or Kidneys). (For
a description of the patterns causing pale corners of the eyes, see
Chapter 61
 
.)
Box 6.13
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal colours
in the eye corners.
 
BOX 6.13
 
   
 
ABNORMAL COLOUR OF
CORNERS OF THE EYES
• 
 
Redness of outer corner: Heart-Fire
• 
 
Redness of inner corner: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Redness of either corner: Liver-Fire, invasion of
external Wind-Heat
• 
 
Redness of inner corner in the evening: Lung-Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Redness of outer corner in the evening: Heart-Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Redness of either corner in the evening: Liver-Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat, Kidney-Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat
• 
 
Redness of either corner with sticky-yellow discharge:
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Redness starting from the inner corners extending
towards the centre: Yin and Yang Heel Vessels pathology
• 
 
Pale corners of the eyes: Blood deficiency (of Liver or
Heart); or Yang deficiency (of Spleen or Kidneys)
310
Abnormal colour of the eye sockets
Dark eye sockets usually indicate Phlegm; dark-purple eye sockets
indicate severe Blood stasis. A bluish colour in the lower part of
the eye socket usually indicates a Kidney deficiency; a swelling of
the lower part of the eye socket extending down towards the cheek
indicates a pathology of the Large Intestine. A pale-greenish
colour under the eyes generally indicates Liver-Qi stagnation. A
dark-blue colour under the eyes indicates Cold in the Liver
channel.
Box 6.14
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal colours in
the eye sockets.
 
BOX 6.14
 
   
 
ABNORMAL COLOUR OF
EYE SOCKETS
• 
 
Dark: Phlegm
• 
 
Dark purple: Blood stasis
• 
 
Bluish: Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Swelling of lower part of socket extending towards
cheek: Large Intestine pathology
• 
 
Pale greenish: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Dark blue: Cold in Liver channel
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:25 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 572.
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s
Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 573.
4. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:129 Para 11. First
311
published c. 100
BC
 
.
5. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 128.
6. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 151.
7. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 151–152.
8. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 50.
9. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 50.
10. 
Simple Questions, p. 36.
11. 
Simple Questions, p. 25.
12. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 32
13. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 40
14. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 40
15. 
Simple Questions, p. 572.
16. 
Simple Questions, p. 572.
17. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 151
18. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 112
19. 
Simple Question, p. 184.
20. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 56
21. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 44
22. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 35
23. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 40
24. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 43
25. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 33
26. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 56
27. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 33
28. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 151
29. 
Eyes that are too wet (though obviously not when crying or
because of a condition such as allergic rhinitis) may
indicate a strong sexual drive
30. 
Great Treatise of Ophthalmology (
Yan Ke Da Quan
 
1644) cited in Ma Zhong Xue 1989 Great Treatise of Chinese
Diagnostic Methods (
Zhong Guo Yi Xue Zhen Fa Da Quan
 
), Shandong Science Publishing House, p. 23.
31. 
Spiritual Axis, pp. 133–134
312
CHAPTER 7
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE NOSE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE NOSE
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE NOSE AND THE INTERNAL
ORGANS
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale
Yellow
Red
Bluish-greenish
Reddish-purple
Dark
SWOLLEN NOSE
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSTRILS)
DRY NOSTRILS
NOSEBLEED
POLYPS
313
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
INTRODUCTION
The nose was called in ancient China the ‘Bright Hall’ (
ming tang
 
)
of the face and it is a place where the clear Yang converges. The
nose is the convergence of clear Yang for two reasons: first,
because it takes in air, which is Yang in nature, and, secondly,
because the Governing Vessel (‘Governor’ of all Yang energies)
flows through the nose. In pathological conditions when clear
Yang does not ascend to the nose, turbid Yin accumulates there
causing conditions such as chronic sinusitis or rhinitis.
Another reason for the nose being called the Bright Hall in
ancient times is related to Chinese face reading, according to
which the nose represents the years from 41 to 49 in a person’s life.
Since these were considered to be the times when people
established their career on a firm basis, the nose was compared to
a hall – the most important room in a Chinese house in ancient
times.
The patterns causing each of the nose signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 58
 
.
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE NOSE
The nose is influenced primarily by the Lung channel because the
Lung ‘opens’ into the nose and controls the sense of smell.
Chapter 37
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The nose is the sense organ
of the Lungs
 
’
 
1
 
and 
Chapter 17
 
says: 
‘
Lung-Qi penetrates the nose,
when the nose is harmonized it can smell
 
.’
 
2
 
Chapter 4
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The West corresponds to the white colour
and it is related to the Lungs which opens into the nose.
 
’
 
3
 
The Song
dynasty doctor Chen Wu Ze said: 
‘
The nose is the orifice of the
Lungs through which we breathe and smell; in the nose Yang-Qi
ascends and Yin-Qi descends so that it is the passage of Clear Qi.
 
’
 
4
It is interesting to note that the Lung channel does not actually
314
reach the nose and it therefore influences the nose through the
Large Intestine channel.
The pathways of the channels flowing through or around the
nose are as follows:
 
• 
 
both the Main and Muscle channels of the Large
Intestine channel flow to the bottom of the nose (and
influence the sense of smell)
• 
 
the Stomach channel connects with the nose
• 
 
the Bladder Muscle channel reaches the bridge of the
nose
• 
 
the Governing Vessel flows downwards through the
nose.
The channels flowing through or around the nose are illustrated
in 
Figure 7.1
 
.
315
FIG. 7.1
 
Channels coursing through the nose
Through their channels, the Large Intestine and Governing
Vessel influence the sense of smell and cause symptoms such as
sneezing in allergic rhinitis or nasal discharge in sinusitis.
Box 7.1
 
summarizes the channels influencing the nose.
 
BOX 7.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE NOSE
• 
 
Lung Main channel (although it does not go to the
nose)
• 
 
Governing Vessel
• 
 
Large Intestine Main and Muscle channels
• 
 
Stomach Main channel
• 
 
Bladder Muscle channel
316
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE
NOSE AND THE INTERNAL ORGANS
Apart from the relationship between the nose and these channels,
the shape and colour of the nose have particular diagnostic
significance in facial diagnosis. In fact, pathological colours of the
nose may reflect pathology of other organs such as the Liver and
Spleen. 
Chapter 37
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The Bright Hall
[nose] can have five [pathological] colours reflecting the Qi of the
five Yin organs.
 
’
 
5
 
Different parts of the nose are related to different
organs and these are illustrated in 
Figure 7.2
 
. 
Chapter 19
 
of the
‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The bone of the Bright Hall [bridge of the
nose] should be high, even and straight; the state of the five Yin
organs can be determined from the centre of the nose, while the
state of the six Yang organs from the sides.
 
’
 
6
FIG. 7.2
 
Organs reflected on the nose
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale
317
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
A pale nose may indicate Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
with Empty-Cold; in such cases the pallor is primarily at the tip.
Blood deficiency (usually of the Liver) may cause the bridge of
the nose to become pale. Among the Full conditions Phlegm-
Fluids may cause the tip of the nose to become pale and swollen. A
white and very dry nose indicates severe Lung-Qi deficiency.
Box 7.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a pale nose.
 
BOX 7.2
 
   
 
PALE NOSE
• 
 
Pale tip: Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with
Empty-Cold
• 
 
Pale bridge: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Pale and swollen tip: Phlegm-Fluids
• 
 
Pale and dry: Lung-Qi deficiency
Yellow
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
The yellowness ranges from a fresh, bright yellow to a dull
yellow. If the yellowness is caused by DampHeat (usually in the
Spleen), it will be bright if Heat predominates and dull if
Dampness predominates.
A chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency with retention of Dampness is a
common cause of a dull-yellow colour, usually at the tip of the
nose. Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm may cause the nose to
become yellow and dry.
Liver-Blood stasis may cause a dull, dark yellow on the bridge of
the nose. Spleen-Heat causes the tip of the nose to become bright
yellow and dry. Finally, Phlegm-Fluids may cause the tip of the
nose to become yellow and swollen.
Box 7.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a yellow nose.
 
BOX 7.3
 
   
 
YELLOW NOSE
• 
 
Bright yellow: Damp-Heat in Spleen with
predominance of Heat
• 
 
Dull yellow: Damp-Heat in Spleen with predominance
318
of Dampness
• 
 
Yellow and dry: Phlegm with Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Dull, dark yellow: Liver-Blood stasis
• 
 
Bright yellow and dry tip: Spleen-Heat
• 
 
Yellow and swollen tip: Phlegm-Fluids
Red
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Lung-Heat may cause a redness of the nose, especially on the
upper part of the bridge. Liver-Fire is a common cause of redness
of the central part of the bridge. Full- or Empty-Heat of the Spleen
may cause a redness of the tip of the nose. Finally, the bridge of the
nose may become red in invasions of Wind-Heat.
Box 7.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a red nose.
 
BOX 7.4
 
   
 
RED NOSE
• 
 
Red in upper part: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Red in central part: Liver-Fire
• 
 
Red tip: Spleen-Heat or Empty-Heat
• 
 
Red bridge with acute onset: Wind-Heat
Bluish-Greenish
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Liver-Blood stasis may cause the nose bridge to become
greenish, whereas Phlegm-Fluids may turn the nose tip bluish.
Internal Cold may cause the bridge of the nose to become bluish.
Box 7.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a bluish-greenish
nose.
 
BOX 7.5
 
   
 
BLUISH-GREENISH NOSE
• 
 
Greenish bridge: Liver-Blood stasis
• 
 
Bluish tip: Phlegm-Fluids
• 
 
Bluish bridge: internal Cold
319
Reddish-Purple
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
A reddish-purple nose always indicates Blood stasis occurring
against a background of Heat. Blood stasis may occur in the Liver,
in which case the bridge of the nose would be reddish-purple; in
the Heart, in which case the area of the bridge between the eyes is
reddishpurple; 
or in the Stomach, in which case the alae nasi (the
outside of the nostrils) become reddish purple.
Box 7.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a reddish-purple
nose.
 
BOX 7.6
 
   
 
REDDISH-PURPLE NOSE
• 
 
Reddish-purple bridge: Liver-Blood stasis
• 
 
Reddish-purple in upper bridge between eyes: Heart-
Blood stasis
• 
 
Reddish-purple nostrils: Blood stasis in Stomach
Dark
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
A dark nose may be very dark, bluish-purple or may reach the
point of being dull black. Dull blackness may indicate extreme
Heat and a dark bluish-purple extreme deficiency, especially of the
Kidneys. A dark and dry nose indicates Kidney-Yin deficiency,
often deriving from excessive sexual activity. A dark-yellowish nose
suggests Blood stasis. A dark nose appearing in a woman after
childbirth may indicate a severe deficiency of Lungs and Stomach.
Box 7.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a dark nose.
 
BOX 7.7
 
   
 
DARK NOSE
• 
 
Dull black: extreme Heat (usually of Liver)
• 
 
Dark bluish-purple: extreme Deficiency
• 
 
Dark and dry: Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dark yellowish: Blood stasis
• 
 
Dark nose in woman after childbirth: severe
deficiency of Lungs and Stomach
320
SWOLLEN NOSE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
The nose can become swollen from Damp-Heat, Phlegm or Heat:
the latter may derive from the Lungs, Heart or Liver. If the nose is
swollen from Heat it will also be red, whereas if it is swollen from
Phlegm it will be greasy. Empty Heat of the Heart or Kidneys may
also cause the nose to swell.
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE
OF THE NOSTRILS)
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
The most common cause of flapping alae nasi is Lung-Heat in
acute conditions. It may also appear in Lung- Empty Heat and in
external invasions of Wind-Heat.
DRY NOSTRILS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Dry nostrils can be caused either by Heat or Empty-Heat, usually
affecting the Lung or Stomach channel. In acute febrile diseases,
dry nostrils may be caused by Toxic Heat; in the beginning stages
of respiratory infections they are caused by invasions of Wind-
Heat.
NOSEBLEED
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
The two main causes of nosebleed, as in other forms of bleeding,
are Heat agitating the Blood or deficient Qi unable to hold Blood.
In the case of nosebleed, the organs most frequently involved are
Liver, Stomach and Lungs (with patterns of Heat) or the Spleen
(deficient Spleen-Qi not holding Blood). Acute nosebleed may be
caused by invasion of Wind-Heat.
321
POLYPS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Polyps in the nose are caused either by Damp-Heat in the
Stomach and Spleen or by Phlegm affecting the Lungs. Polyps
caused by Damp-Heat are frequently seen in chronic sinusitis.
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Ulcers on the nose are usually due either to Lung-Heat or to
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen.
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Red papules on the nose may indicate Stomach-Heat, Lung-
Heat, or, if they are dark, Blood-Heat in the Lungs.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine:
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:78 First published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine:
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 50.
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:27 First
published c. 100
BC
4. 
Cited in Xue, Ma Zhong. Great Treatise of Chinese
Diagnostic Methods (
Zhong Guo Yi Xue Zhen Fa Da Quan
 
). Shandong: Shandong Science Publishing
House, 1989; 56.
5. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 78
6. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 96
322
CHAPTER 8
 
OBSERVATION
OF LIPS MOUTH,
PALATE, TEETH,
GUMS AND
PHILTRUM
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE MOUTH AND LIPS
LIPS
Abnormal colour
Dry or cracked lips
Peeled lips
Swollen lips
Trembling lips
Inverted lips
323
Drooping lips
MOUTH
Cold sores
Cracked corners of the mouth
Mouth ulcers
Mouth open
Deviation of mouth
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth
PALATE
Abnormal colour
TEETH AND GUMS
Teeth
Gums
PHILTRUM
Flat philtrum
Stiff-looking philtrum
Abnormal colour
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE
MOUTH AND LIPS
From a Five-Element perspective, the mouth and lips are the
orifice of the Spleen, but they are related to many other channels.
The Spleen channel is closely related to both mouth and lips and
Chapter 5
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The Spleen controls the
mouth
 
’
 
1
 
and 
Chapter 4
 
of the same book says: 
‘
The centre pertains
to the yellow colour, it connects with the Spleen which opens into
the mouth.
 
’
 
2
 
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
Spleen-Qi
penetrates within the mouth, when the Spleen is harmonized, the
324
mouth can taste the five flavours.
 
’
 
3
 
Chapter 37
 
of the same book
says: 
‘
The mouth and lips are the orifice of the Spleen.
 
’
 
4
 
and
Chapter 47
 
says: 
‘
When the lips are full, the Spleen is strong; when
the lips are withered, the Spleen is weak; when the lips are hard, the
Spleen has a Full condition; when the lips are large but soft, the
Spleen is depleted. When both lips are in a good condition the
Spleen is healthy; when the lips are deviated upwards, the Spleen is
severely depleted.
 
’
 
5
The Stomach channel is, of course, closely connected to the
mouth because its Main and Muscle channels both flow around
the mouth. 
Chapter 40
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The clear Qi of
the Stomach ascends to the mouth
 
.’
 
6
 
The Large Intestine channel
also flows to the lower part of the nose and its Muscle channels
bind at the side of the nose.
The mouth and lips are therefore influenced primarily by the
Spleen, Stomach and Large Intestine channels; however, the Liver
channel also wraps around the lips and so do the Penetrating and
Directing Vessels. 
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The Liver
channel flows around the inside of the lips.
 
’
 
7
 
The Governing Vessel
penetrates through the upper lip and the upper gum. Internally,
other channels flow to the 
inside of the mouth and the tongue and,
in particular, the Heart Connecting channel, the Kidney Main and
Divergent channel.
As the Heart houses the Mind, it controls all the senses and
therefore also the mouth and taste.
The saliva is mostly under the control of the Stomach, Spleen
and Kidneys, and a normal level of moisture in the mouth
indicates a normal state of the Body Fluids.
The channels flowing to or around the mouth are illustrated in
Figure 8.1
 
, and 
Box 8.1
 
summarizes them.
 
BOX 8.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS FLOWING TO OR
AROUND THE MOUTH AND LIPS
• 
 
Stomach Main and Muscle channels
• 
 
Large Intestine
• 
 
Liver
• 
 
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Directing Vessel
325
• 
 
Heart Connecting channel
• 
 
Kidney Main and Divergent channels
• 
 
Governing Vessel
FIG. 8.1
 
Channels flowing around the mouth
326
LIPS
The following lip signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
abnormal colour (pale, red, purple, bluish-greenish
and yellow lips, abnormal lip colour in pregnancy)
• 
 
dry or cracked lips
• 
 
peeled lips
• 
 
swollen lips
• 
 
trembling lips
• 
 
inverted lips
• 
 
drooping lips.
The colour of the lips primarily reflects the state of the Spleen,
Heart and Liver. It also reflects conditions of Blood deficiency,
Yang deficiency, Heat and Blood stasis. The normal lips, like the
complexion, should be pale red and slightly moist, and not
swollen, withered, contracted or quivering. The normal pale-red
colour of the lips reflects the normal condition of Qi and Blood,
their moistness reflects the normal condition of Body Fluids, and
their normal movement reflects a normal condition of the Mind
and Spirit.
The patterns causing each of the lip signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Abnormal Colour
Pale lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
When the lips are paler than the normal pale red, they indicate
either Blood or Yang deficiency of the Spleen or Liver. In cases of
Blood deficiency, especially of the Liver, they might also be slightly
dry, while in cases of Yang deficiency they are usually moist. Pale-
greyish 
lips the colour of paper indicate severe Blood deficiency.
For a more detailed description of the patterns involved, see
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 8.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying pale lips.
327
 
BOX 8.2
 
   
 
PALE LIPS
• 
 
Pale and slightly dry: Blood deficiency of the Spleen
or Liver
• 
 
Pale and moist: Yang deficiency of the Spleen or Liver
• 
 
Pale greyish: severe Blood deficiency
Red lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Red lips are always caused by Heat, which can be Full or Empty,
and acute or chronic. Full-Heat of most organs, and especially the
Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Kidneys and Spleen, may cause the
lips to be red and swollen; Empty-Heat of the same organs may
cause the lips to be red and dry. Acute invasions of Wind-Heat may
also cause the lips to become bright red but this happens mostly
in children; at the Qi level of acute febrile diseases, the lips also
become bright red and they are also cracked and dry in cases of
Fire. For a more detailed description of the patterns involved, see
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 8.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying red lips.
 
BOX 8.3
 
   
 
RED LIPS
• 
 
Red and swollen: Full-Heat especially of the Lungs,
Heart, Stomach, Liver, Kidneys and Spleen
• 
 
Red and dry: Empty-Heat of the Lungs, Heart,
Stomach, Liver, Kidneys and Spleen
• 
 
Bright red (mostly in children): acute invasions of
Wind-Heat, Qi level of acute febrile diseases
• 
 
Bright red, cracked and dry: Fire
Purple lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Purple lips may reflect Blood stasis, in which case they tend to
be reddish-purple, or Cold (which may be Full or Empty), in which
328
case they tend to be bluish-purple. Bluish-purple and dark lips
indicate extreme Cold. Long-standing retention of Phlegm in the
Lungs often leads to Blood stasis and this may also cause the lips
to be bluish-purple. Finally, the lips may become reddish-purple at
the Nutritive-Qi or Blood levels in acute febrile diseases. For a
more detailed description of the patterns involved, see 
Chapter 60
.
Box 8.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying purple lips.
 
BOX 8.4
 
   
 
PURPLE LIPS
• 
 
Reddish-purple: Blood stasis, Nutritive-Qi or Blood
levels of acute febrile diseases
• 
 
Bluish-purple: Full- or Empty-Cold, retention of
Phlegm in the Lungs
Bluish-greenish lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
‘Bluish-green’ is a translation of the Chinese word 
qing
 
. The
colour 
qing
 
may be either bluish or greenish depending on the
pattern involved. The lips may become bluish in case of Cold,
which may be Full or Empty, and greenish in case of Blood stasis,
which may affect Heart, Lungs, Stomach or Liver. For a more
detailed description of the patterns involved, see 
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 8.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying bluish-greenish
lips.
 
BOX 8.5
 
   
 
BLUISH-GREENISH LIPS
• 
 
Bluish: Full- or Empty-Cold
• 
 
Greenish: Blood stasis of Heart, Lungs, Stomach or
Liver
Yellow lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Yellow lips are usually caused by Dampness in the Stomach and
329
Spleen, which may be associated with Heat or Cold; another
possible cause of yellow lips is Full-Heat with Blood stasis. For a
more detailed description of the patterns involved, see 
Chapter 60
.
Box 8.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying yellow lips.
 
BOX 8.6
 
   
 
YELLOW LIPS
• 
 
Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen with Heat or
Cold
• 
 
Full-Heat with Blood stasis
Abnormal lip colour in pregnancy
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Florid, red and full lips indicate a good state of the Penetrating
Vessel and an easy childbirth. Pale lips in pregnancy indicate Blood
deficiency and possibly a difficult childbirth. A white colour and
dryness of the 
corners of the mouth indicate severe Blood
deficiency and also the possibility of a difficult birth. Bluish lips in
pregnancy indicate Blood stasis from Cold and are always
considered to be a dangerous sign. A bluish face and dark lips or a
dark face and bluish lips in pregnancy also signal danger.
Box 8.7
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal lip colour in
pregnancy.
 
BOX 8.7
 
   
 
ABNORMAL LIP COLOUR IN
PREGNANCY
• 
 
Pale: Blood deficiency
• 
 
White and dryness of the corners of the mouth: severe
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Bluish: Blood stasis from Cold
Dry Or Cracked Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common causes of dry lips are Stomach- and Spleen-
330
Yin deficiency or Liver-Blood deficiency. Full-Heat or Empty-Heat
may also cause the lips to become dry and cracked. Severe, long-
standing Blood stasis may lead to the same effect because stagnant
Blood prevents the proper generation and movement of Body
Fluids. In acute cases, invasion of Wind-Heat can cause dry lips.
If the upper lip is dry, it indicates Lung-Heat or Heat in the
Large Intestine. If the lower lip is dry, it indicates Heat in the
Stomach. If the lips are dry but red, the condition is not severe and
the prognosis is good. If they are dry but dark, the condition is
more serious and the prognosis less good. For a more detailed
description of the patterns involved, see 
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 8.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dry, cracked lips.
 
BOX 8.8
 
   
 
DRY, CRACKED LIPS
• 
 
Dry and slightly red: Spleen-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dry and pale: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Dry, cracked and red: Full-Heat (of Stomach and
Spleen)
• 
 
Dry and slightly red: Empty-Heat (of Stomach and
Spleen)
• 
 
Dry and purple: Blood stasis
• 
 
Dry with acute onset: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Dry upper lip: Heat in Lungs or Large Intestine
• 
 
Dry lower lip: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Dry and red: prognosis good
• 
 
Dry and dark: prognosis not good
Peeled Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
‘Peeled lips’ refers to lips that are peeled, fresh red, cracked and
swollen. The causes of this are either Spleen-Heat or Spleen-Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Swollen Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
331
A swelling of the lips always indicates Heat, usually either
Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat affecting the Stomach and Spleen. An
acute swelling of the lips may also be due to an allergic reaction.
For a more detailed description of the patterns causing swollen
lips, refer to 
Chapter 60
 
.
Trembling Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of trembling lips is Spleen-Qi
deficiency. It may also be caused by Blood deficiency with Empty-
Wind or Stomach-Fire.
Inverted Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Inverted lips may be caused either by a severe Yang or a severe
Yin deficiency. Contracted lips which do not cover the teeth, with a
short philtrum, in the course of a serious disease indicate collapse
of Spleen-Yin.
Drooping Lips
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Drooping lips may be caused either by sinking of Spleen-Qi or
deficiency of Spleen- and Kidney-Yang.
MOUTH
The patterns causing each of the mouth signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 60
 
.
The following mouth signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
cold sores
• 
 
cracked corners of the mouth
• 
 
mouth ulcers
• 
 
mouth open
• 
 
deviation of mouth
• 
 
dribbling from the corners of the mouth.
332
Cold Sores
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A sudden attack of cold sores at the corner of the mouth or on
the edge of the upper lip may be due to an external invasion of
Wind-Heat. Chronic or recurrent cold sores at the corner of the
mouth or on the edge of the lower lip may be caused by a Stomach
pathology, either Damp-Heat, Heat or Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat. Heat or Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine may also cause
cold sores, which in this case would be on the upper lip.
Box 8.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying cold sores.
 
BOX 8.9
 
   
 
COLD SORES
• 
 
Sudden-onset cold sores at the corner of the
mouth/edge of the upper lip: external invasion of Wind-
Heat
• 
 
Chronic or recurrent cold sores at the corner of the
mouth/edge of the lower lip: Damp-Heat, Heat or Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Cold sores on the upper lip: Heat or Damp-Heat in
the Large Intestine
Cracked Corners Of The Mouth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Cracked and dry corners of the mouth are due either to
Stomach-Heat or to Stomach-Yin deficiency with or without
Empty-Heat.
Box 8.10
 
summarizes the patterns underlying cracked corners of
the mouth.
 
BOX 8.10
 
   
 
CRACKED CORNERS OF THE
MOUTH
• 
 
Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Stomach-Yin deficiency with or without Empty-Heat
333
Mouth Ulcers
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common causes of mouth ulcers are Stomach-Heat,
when the ulcers have a red rim and will appear on the gums or
inside the cheeks, and Heart-Fire, when the ulcers will be on the
tip of the tongue. Mouth ulcers may also derive from a deficiency
either of Yin (normally accompanied by some Empty-Heat) or of
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi. A sudden attack of ulcers inside the
cheeks may accompany an external invasion of Wind.
Box 8.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying mouth ulcers.
 
BOX 8.11
 
   
 
MOUTH ULCERS
• 
 
Ulcers with red rim on gums/inside cheeks: Stomach-
Heat
• 
 
Ulcers on the tip of tongue: Heart-Fire
• 
 
Deficiency of Yin, or Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
• 
 
Sudden-onset ulcers inside the cheeks: external
invasion of Wind
Mouth Open
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
‘Mouth open’ means that the person keeps the mouth open all
the time. The most common cause of the mouth being wide open
is deficiency of Lung-Qi with retention of Phlegm in the Lungs.
Patients suffering from asthma often have their mouth open as
they struggle to breathe and this itself usually indicates Lung-Qi
deficiency and Phlegm in the Lungs.
The mouth could also be slightly open from Heart-Heat and, in
this case, it usually reflects emotional problems.
Box 8.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying ‘mouth open’.
 
BOX 8.12
 
   
 
MOUTH OPEN
• 
 
Mouth wide open: deficiency of Lung-Qi with
retention of Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Mouth open with struggling for breath: Lung-Qi
deficiency and Phlegm in the Lungs
334
• 
 
Mouth slightly open: Heart-Heat
Deviation Of Mouth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
There are two basic causes of deviation of the mouth; one is
internal Liver-Wind, the other is invasion of external Wind in the
channels of the face. From a Western perspective, the former
usually corresponds to central paralysis (which is caused by a
lesion of the central nervous system), while the latter is called
peripheral paralysis and is caused by a lesion of the peripheral
nerves (
Fig. 8.2
 
).
FIG. 8.2
 
Deviation of mouth
In some cases, deviation of the mouth may be caused by Liver-
Qi stagnation, in which case it is not a permanent deviation but
one that comes and goes according to the emotional state. A
general deficiency of Qi and Blood may cause a slight deviation of
the mouth. Finally, Toxic Heat affecting the Lesser-Yang 
and Bright-
335
Yang channels of the face may also cause deviation of the mouth.
Box 8.13
 
summarizes the patterns underlying deviation of the
mouth.
 
BOX 8.13
 
   
 
DEVIATION OF MOUTH
• 
 
Internal Liver-Wind (central paralysis)
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind in face channels (peripheral
paralysis)
• 
 
Toxic Heat affecting the Lesser-Yang and Bright-Yang
channels of the face
• 
 
Deviation that comes and goes with the emotional
state: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Slight deviation: general deficiency of Qi and Blood
Dribbling From The Corners Of The Mouth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth may be caused by Qi
deficiency of the Spleen or Lungs, or both, usually with Empty-
Cold. Internal Wind, often combined with Phlegm, in the elderly is
a common cause of dribbling from the corners of the mouth and
this symptom is frequently seen after an attack of Wind-stroke. An
invasion of external Wind in the channels of the face (the same
pathology as in facial paralysis) may also cause dribbling from the
corners of the mouth.
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen may also cause dribbling from
the corners of the mouth.
Box 8.14
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dribbling.
 
BOX 8.14
 
   
 
DRIBBLING FROM THE
CORNERS OF THE MOUTH
• 
 
Qi deficiency of the Spleen/Lungs, often with Empty-
Cold
• 
 
Internal Wind, often combined with Phlegm, in the
elderly
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind in the face channels
• 
 
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
336
PALATE
The normal palate should be pale red, bright and moist. It can be
divided into five areas, each corresponding to one of the Yin
organs (
Fig. 8.3
 
).
FIG. 8.3
 
Areas of the palate corresponding to the Yin organs
Abnormal Colour
The following palate signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
pale palate
• 
 
dull-pale palate
• 
 
yellow palate
• 
 
red palate
• 
 
purple palate.
The patterns causing each of the palate signs discussed below
are listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 60
 
.
337
Pale palate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
This describes a palate that is too pale and looks like the skin of
milk; it indicates deficiency of Stomach and Spleen.
Dull-pale palate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A dull-pale palate indicates Blood deficiency or Qi and Blood
deficiency.
Yellow palate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A yellow palate indicates a pathology of the Stomach and
Spleen, and in particular an Empty pathology if it is dull yellow
and a Full pathology (such as Damp-Heat) if it is bright yellow.
Red palate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A red palate indicates Full-Heat, which may derive from any
organ, but in particular the Stomach, Lungs and Liver.
Purple palate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A purple palate indicates Blood stasis.
Box 8.15
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal palate
colours.
 
BOX 8.15
 
   
 
ABNORMAL PALATE
COLOURS
• 
 
Pale: deficiency of Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Dull-pale: Blood/Qi deficiency
• 
 
Dull yellow: Empty pathology of Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Bright yellow: Full pathology (such as Damp-Heat) of
Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Red: Full-Heat particularly of Stomach, Lungs and
Liver
• 
 
Purple: Blood stasis
338
TEETH AND GUMS
The teeth and gums are closely related to the Stomach, Large
Intestine and Kidneys. 
Chapter 63
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The
teeth are at the end of the Stomach channel.
 
’
 
8
 
Chapter 10
 
of the
same book says: 
‘
The Stomach channel … enters the region of the
upper teeth.
 
’
 
9
 
The same chapter also says: ‘
The Large Intestine
channel … enters the region of the lower teeth.
 
’
 
10
 
The Governing
Vessel also influences the upper and lower gums in the midline of
the body. The Kidney organ and channel specifically influence the
teeth because the teeth are considered to be an extension of the
bones.
Chapter 1
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ describing the 7- and 8-year
cycles of women and men clearly relates the development and
decay of bones to the flourishing and decline of Kidney-Qi: 
‘
When
a girl is 7 years old, Kidney-Qi is flourishing and the teeth grow …
when she is 21 Kidney-Qi is at its peak and the second teeth are
fully grown … when a boy is 8 years old, Kidney-Qi is flourishing
and the teeth grow … when he is 24 Kidney-Qi is at its peak and
the second teeth are fully grown … when he is 64 the teeth fall out
 
.’
11
 
The gums are also influenced by the Kidneys.
Box 8.16
 
summarizes the channels influencing the teeth and
gums.
 
BOX 8.16
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE TEETH AND GUMS
• 
 
Stomach (gums)
• 
 
Large Intestine (gums)
• 
 
Kidneys (teeth and gums)
• 
 
Governing Vessel (teeth and gums)
The following teeth signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
tooth cavities
• 
 
loose teeth
• 
 
plaque
• 
 
dry and white teeth
339
• 
 
dry and dull teeth
• 
 
yellow and dry teeth
• 
 
grey teeth
• 
 
upper teeth moist and lower teeth dry.
The patterns causing each of the teeth and gum signs discussed
below are listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 60
 
.
Teeth
Tooth cavities
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
From the Chinese perspective, cavities may be caused by Damp-
Heat in the Stomach channel, by Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency and by a Kidney deficiency.
Loose teeth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Again, from the Chinese perspective, teeth may become loose
either from Heat or Empty-Heat of the Stomach or Large Intestine,
or both, or from a Kidney deficiency (which may be of Yin or
Yang). Stomach-Heat and Empty-Heat of the Spleen or Kidneys
may all cause loose teeth.
Plaque
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common causes of plaque are Stomach-Heat or Heat in
the Kidneys and Stomach. Another possible cause is Kidney-Yin
deficiency.
Box 8.17
 
summarizes patterns underlying bad teeth.
 
BOX 8.17
 
   
 
BAD TEETH
• 
 
Cavities: Damp-Heat in the Stomach channel,
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi or Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Loose teeth: Heat or Empty-Heat of the
Stomach/Large Intestine/Spleen/Kidneys, Kidney-Yin or
340
-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Plaque: Heat in the Kidneys/Stomach, Kidney-Yin
deficiency
Dry and white teeth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
‘White’ here indicates teeth that are bright white and dry. The
most common cause of white, dry teeth is either external Heat
injuring the body fluids, or Stomach-Heat.
Dry and dull teeth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
‘Dry and dull teeth’ indicates teeth that are white but dull and
very dry like old bones that have been exposed to the sun for a
long time. The most common cause of dry and dull teeth is a
Kidney-Yin deficiency with or without Empty-Heat; in the case of
Empty-Heat, the teeth will be particularly dry. Another possible
cause is Blood deficiency.
Yellow and dry teeth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of ‘yellow and dry teeth’ is Damp-Heat
in the Stomach and Spleen, with a predominance of Heat. Another
possible cause of yellow and dry teeth is a long-standing Kidney-
Yin deficiency. In a few cases, it may be due to long-standing
accumulation of Cold. This happens when the accumulation of
Cold in the abdomen impairs the circulation of Yang-Qi in the
Greater-Yang and Bright-Yang channels, resulting in the
accumulation of Yang energy in the top part of these channels and
in the Governing Vessel over the teeth.
Grey teeth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of grey teeth is Kidney-Yin deficiency
with Empty-Heat. Greyish teeth the colour of ash indicate
341
Stomach- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with turbid Dampness.
Box 8.18
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal teeth colour.
 
BOX 8.18
 
   
 
ABNORMAL TEETH COLOUR
• 
 
Dry and white: external Heat injuring the body fluids,
Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Dry and dull: Kidney-Yin deficiency with/without
Empty-Heat, Blood deficiency
• 
 
Yellow and dry: Damp-Heat in the Stomach and
Spleen, Kidney-Yin deficiency, accumulation of Cold
• 
 
Grey: Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Ash-like grey: Stomach- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
with turbid Dampness
Upper teeth moist and lower teeth dry
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
When the upper teeth are moist and the lower teeth dry, it
indicates Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat in the Heart.
Gums
The following gum signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
inflamed gums
• 
 
bleeding gums
• 
 
receding gums
• 
 
gums oozing pus
• 
 
pale gums
• 
 
red gums
• 
 
purple gums.
The patterns causing each of the gum signs discussed below are
listed in greater detail in 
Chapter 60
 
.
Inflamed gums
342
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of inflamed gums is Heat or Empty-
Heat in the Stomach or Large Intestine, or both. Yin Fire may also
cause inflamed gums.
Bleeding gums
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Deficient Spleen-Qi not holding blood is the most common
cause of chronic bleeding gums. Stomach-Fire is also a common
cause of bleeding gums, in which case the gums would be red and
swollen and this symptom by itself allows us to differentiate
Stomach-Fire from Stomach-Heat. Empty-Heat in the Stomach or
Kidneys may also cause bleeding gums. Finally, Yin Fire may also
cause bleeding gums.
Receding gums
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of receding gums is Qi and Blood
deficiency. Receding gums may also be caused by Stomach-Fire or
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Gums oozing pus
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of gums oozing pus is Stomach-Fire
but in chronic conditions it may be caused by a severe deficiency
of Qi and Blood.
Box 8.19
 
summarizes patterns underlying gum problems.
 
BOX 8.19
 
   
 
GUM PROBLEMS
• 
 
Inflamed: Heat or Empty-Heat in the Stomach/Large
Intestine, Yin Fire
• 
 
Bleeding: Deficient Spleen-Qi not holding blood,
Empty-Heat in Stomach/Kidneys, Yin Fire
• 
 
Bleeding, red and swollen: Stomach-Fire
• 
 
Receding: Qi and Blood deficiency, Stomach-Fire,
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Gums oozing pus: Stomach-Fire
• 
 
Gums oozing pus (chronic): severe deficiency of Qi
343
and Blood
Pale gums
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Pale gums may reflect a Spleen-Qi deficiency, a Blood deficiency
or a Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold.
Red gums
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
Red gums reflect Heat or Empty-Heat in the Stomach or Spleen.
If they are also swollen and painful, this indicates Stomach-Fire.
Slightly red gums, without swelling, and loose teeth that are
painful in the afternoon indicate Kidney-Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat.
Purple gums
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The most common cause of purple gums is Blood stasis in the
Stomach.
Box 8.20
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal gum
colours.
 
BOX 8.20
 
   
 
ABNORMAL GUM COLOURS
• 
 
Pale: Spleen-Qi or Blood deficiency, Spleen-Yang
deficiency with Empty-Cold
• 
 
Red: heat or Empty-Heat in the Stomach or Spleen
• 
 
Red, swollen and painful: Stomach-Fire
• 
 
Slightly red without swelling, with loose teeth painful
in the afternoon: Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat
• 
 
Purple: Blood stasis in the Stomach
PHILTRUM
344
The philtrum is the area between the bottom of the nose and the
upper lip, defined by the two vertical ridges (
Fig. 8.4
 
).
FIG. 8.4
 
The philtrum
The philtrum area is influenced by the Large Intestine channel
and by the Governing Vessel. In 
facial diagnosis, it reflects the
state of the Bladder and Uterus. The philtrum should be well
defined by the two vertical ridges and well proportioned, that is,
not too long or too short. In face reading, the shape and
appearance of the philtrum is related to fertility in women: a
shallow philtrum with poorly defined vertical ridges or a very
short philtrum indicates either infertility or difficulty in conceiving
(
Fig. 8.5
 
).
FIG. 8.5
 
Philtrum indicating possible infertility
In observing the philtrum, one should note its shape and its
colour. In terms of shape, the philtrum may be too flat and
undefined or too pronounced with stiff-looking ridges. The
pathological colours of the philtrum include pale, red, bluish-
greenish or dark.
The following philtrum signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
flat philtrum
• 
 
stiff-looking philtrum
345
• 
 
abnormal colour (pale philtrum, red philtrum, bluish-
greenish philtrum and dark philtrum).
The patterns causing each of the philtrum signs listed below are
discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 60
 
.
Flat Philtrum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The flat philtrum is poorly defined and the vertical ridges are
not pronounced. The most common significance of a flat philtrum
is a Kidney deficiency. It may also indicate Damp-Heat in the
Stomach and Spleen (
Fig. 8.6
 
).
FIG. 8.6
 
Flat philtrum
Stiff-Looking Philtrum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
The stiff-looking philtrum is pronounced, its vertical ridges are
overly defined and the upper lip curls up slightly (
Fig. 8.7
 
).
346
FIG. 8.7
 
Stiff-looking philtrum
A stiff-looking philtrum generally indicates Blood stasis.
Abnormal Colour
Pale philtrum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A pale philtrum indicates either Qi deficiency or Cold, which
may be of the Full or Empty type.
Red philtrum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A red philtrum indicates either Blood-Heat, often in the Uterus,
or, in acute cases, external invasion of Wind-Heat.
Bluish-greenish philtrum (qing)
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A bluish philtrum indicates internal Cold while a greenish
philtrum indicates a Liver pattern, often stagnation of Liver-Qi.
Dark philtrum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 60
A dark philtrum indicates chronic Blood-Heat or Damp-Heat in
the Lower Burner.
Box 8.21
 
summarizes philtrum signs.
 
BOX 8.21
 
   
 
PHILTRUM SIGNS
• 
 
Flat: Kidney deficiency, Damp-Heat in the Stomach
and Spleen
• 
 
Stiff-looking: Blood stasis
• 
 
Pale: Qi deficiency, Full- or Empty-Cold
347
• 
 
Red: Blood-Heat, often in the Uterus, external
invasion of Wind-Heat
• 
 
Bluish: internal Cold
• 
 
Greenish: Liver pattern, often stagnation of Liver-Qi
• 
 
Dark: chronic Blood-Heat, Damp-Heat in the Lower
Burner
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:39 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:27.
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:50 First published c. 100
BC
4. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 78.
5. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 91.
6. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 81.
7. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 35–36.
8. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 114.
9. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 31.
10. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 31.
11. 
Simple Questions, pp. 5–6.
348
CHAPTER 9
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE EARS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EARS
EAR SIZE
Large ears
Small ears
Swollen ears
Contracted ears
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
SORES ON THE EAR
WARTS ON THE EAR
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Yellow helix
Pale helix
Bluish-greenish (
qing
 
) helix
Dark helix
349
Red helix
Red back of the ear
Swelling and redness of the concha
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
INTRODUCTION
The ears are related to the Kidneys. 
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’ says: 
‘
Kidney-Qi opens into the ears, when the Kidneys are
harmonized the ears can detect the five sounds
 
.’
 
1
 
Chapter 5
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The Kidneys govern the ears.
 
’
 
2
 
Chapter 37
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The ears are the sense organ of the
Kidneys.
 
’
 
3
 
Although the relationship between the ears and the
Kidneys is very strong, other organs also influence the ears. For
example, the Heart has an influence on the physiology and
pathology of the ear. 
Chapter 4
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says: 
‘
The
South corresponds to the colour red and to the Heart which opens
into the ear.
 
’
 
4
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EARS
All the Yang channels reach or enter the ears. Both Lesser Yang
channels, that is the Gall-Bladder and Triple Burner, have a strong
influence on the ear also, the former circling around the ear and
the latter entering the ear. These two channels are particularly
involved in acute ear pathologies characterized by either Wind-
Heat or Damp-Heat affecting the ears. The Small Intestine channel
intersects with the Gall-Bladder channel in the region of the ear
and enters the ear at SI-19 Tinggong. The Bladder channel also
intersects with the Gall-Bladder channel in the region of the ear.
The internal pathway of the Stomach channel also reaches the ear,
while the Muscle channel of the Large Intestine travels to the front
350
of the ear.
The pathways of the channels flowing to the ears are
summarized in 
Box 9.1
 
and illustrated in 
Figure 9.1
 
.
 
BOX 9.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE EAR
• 
 
Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Triple Burner
• 
 
Small Intestine
• 
 
Bladder
• 
 
Stomach
• 
 
Large Intestine Muscle channel
351
FIG. 9.1
 
Channels flowing to the ears
The normal ear should be first of all proportionate in size to the
head, it should be relatively moist, its flesh should be full but
supple and the helix should be pale red and moist.
For a more detailed description of the patterns appearing in
symptoms and signs related to the ears, see 
Chapter 57
 
.
The following ear signs will be discussed:
 
• 
 
large ears
• 
 
small ears
• 
 
swollen ears
• 
 
contracted ears
• 
 
dry and contracted helix
352
• 
 
sores on the ear
• 
 
warts on the ear
• 
 
abnormal colour (yellow, pale, bluish-greenish, dark
and red helix, red back of the ear, swelling and redness
of the concha)
• 
 
distended blood vessels on the ear
• 
 
excessive wax production
• 
 
discharge from the ears.
Although the ear may present pathological signs like any other
part of the face, the clinical significance of the observation of the
ears is that they can give us an indication also of the constitution
of the person; for example, large ears with long ear-lobes indicate a
good constitution.
EAR SIZE
Large Ears
The ears should be proportionate to the size of the head and
therefore what is a ‘large’ ear for one person might be ‘normal’ for
another. A large ear generally indicates a good hereditary
constitution, a constitutional tendency to abundance of Qi and
Blood and a propensity to Full conditions. However, it does so only
if it is proportionate to the size of the head, well shaped and does
not stick out, and if the lobe is long and well formed.
Small Ears
Small ears generally indicate a poor hereditary constitution
(especially if the lobe is very small), a constitutional tendency to
deficiency of Qi and Blood and a propensity to Deficiency
conditions.
Swollen Ears
353
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Swollen ears are generally due to Heat or Damp-Heat, which
may derive from various organs but particularly from the Gall-
Bladder. (See 
Plate 9.1 on p. P8
 
.) Another possible cause of
swollen ears is invasion of Wind-Water in the Lungs.
Contracted Ears
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 57
Contracted ears look somewhat ‘crumpled’ and ‘squashed’.
Contracted ears are generally due to deficiency of Body Fluids,
which may derive either from Heat injuring the Body Fluids or
from Yin deficiency. A less common cause of contracted ears is a
severe stasis of Blood in the abdomen with abdominal masses: the
severely stagnant Qi and Blood fail to nourish the muscles and
flesh so that the person loses weight and the ears become
contracted. This situation could, for example, occur with
carcinomas of the abdomen.
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
The most common cause of a contracted, dry helix with a rough
and scaly texture is Blood stasis, sometimes combined with Damp-
Heat. A dry and dark helix may also be due to Kidney-Yin
deficiency. A jagged helix indicates chronic Blood stasis.
SORES ON THE EAR
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Sores on the ear are always due to Heat. They may derive from
various organs but are particularly related to the Liver and Gall-
Bladder. Another cause of acute sores on the ear is invasion of
Wind-Heat in the Lesser Yang channels.
WARTS ON THE EAR
354
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Warts on the ear are generally due to Heat in the Liver and Gall-
Bladder but they may also be due to Heat in the Stomach channel
(as the deep pathway of the Stomach channel goes to the ear).
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Yellow Helix
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Damp-Heat is the most common cause of a yellow helix, in
which case it would be bright yellow if Heat predominates and
dull yellow if Dampness predominates. Another possible cause of
a yellow helix is Blood stasis deriving from Heat, in which case the
helix will be dull, dark yellow.
Pale Helix
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
A pale helix is due either to Yang deficiency (when it will be
bright pale) or to Blood deficiency (when it will be dull pale). A
less common cause of a pale helix is invasion of Wind-Water in the
Lungs. A ‘thick’, deep, white colour indicates Qi deficiency with
Phlegm.
Bluish-Greenish (
Qing
 
) Helix
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Blood stasis is the main cause of a bluish-greenish helix. The
helix is greenish if the Blood stasis derives from Heat and bluish if
it derives from Cold. A particular case of bluish-greenish helix is
that seen in children suffering from acute convulsions from
internal Wind.
Dark Helix
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
The helix may become dark either from Blood stasis or from
chronic Heat. A greenish-dark helix indicates Kidney-Yin
355
deficiency.
Red Helix
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
A red helix generally indicates Heat, especially of the Heart or
Lungs, or both; it may also indicate Heat in the Lesser-Yang
channels or Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder. A floating,
red colour of the helix is due to Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat. (See 
Plate 9.2 on p. P8
 
.)
Red Back Of The Ear
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
The usual cause of redness at the back of the ear is invasion of
Wind-Heat. It is also seen in the beginning stages of measles.
Swelling And Redness Of The Concha
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder is the most common
cause of redness and swelling of the concha. In chronic conditions,
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat may also cause a redness
and swelling of the concha, while in acute conditions Toxic Heat
may cause it.
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON
THE EAR
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
The two main causes of visible distended blood vessels in the
ear are Lung-Qi deficiency with retention of Phlegm, and Blood
stasis.
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
356
Excessive wax production is usually caused by Phlegm, which
may affect various organs. Another common cause of excessive wax
production is Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder. Deficiency
conditions causing excessive wax production include Spleen- and
Kidney-Yang deficiency and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat.
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
In acute cases, discharge from the ear can be due to invasion of
Wind-Heat affecting the Lesser-Yang channels or to Damp-Heat in
the Liver and Gall-Bladder; the latter may also cause ear discharge
in chronic conditions. Both Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness may cause an
intermittent, thin discharge from the ear.
Box 9.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying ear discharge.
 
BOX 9.2
 
   
 
EAR DISCHARGE
• 
 
Acute: invasion of Wind-Heat affecting the Lesser-
Yang channels, Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-
Bladder
• 
 
Chronic: Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Intermittent, thin discharge: Kidney-Yin deficiency
with Empty-Heat, Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:50 First published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:41 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 78
357
4. 
Simple Questions, p. 26.
358
CHAPTER 10
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE THROAT
AND NECK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND NECK
THROAT
Redness on the throat
Goitre
Pulsation of the carotid artery
Observation of the pharynx
Swollen tonsils
Abnormal tonsils colour
NECK
Neck length
Rigidity of the neck
Soft neck
359
Deviated neck
Neck width
Swollen neck glands
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE
THROAT AND NECK
Practically all channels, with the exception of the Bladder, flow
through the throat but the most important channels involved in
the various symptoms and signs of this area are the Directing
Vessel for the front of the neck (throat area), the Stomach and
Large Intestine for the sides of the throat, the Triple Burner and
Gall-Bladder for the sides of the neck and the Governing Vessel
and Bladder channel for the back of the neck.
The pathways of the channels flowing through the neck are
illustrated in 
Figure 10.1
 
and summarized in 
Box 10.1
 
.
 
BOX 10.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE THROAT AND NECK
• 
 
Directing Vessel: front of the neck/throat area
• 
 
Stomach and Large Intestine: sides of throat
• 
 
Triple Burner and Gall-Bladder: sides of neck
• 
 
Governing Vessel and Bladder: back of neck
360
FIG. 10.1
 
Channels flowing through the neck
The symptoms and signs related to throat and neck are
discussed in 
Chapters 59
 
and 
62
 
respectively in 
Part 5
 
.
THROAT
Redness On The Throat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
By ‘throat’ here is meant not the inside of the throat (pharynx)
but a redness on the skin outside.
A redness on the throat area (usually in the front and sides)
always indicates Heat, which may be Full or Empty, and it often
appears during the consultation when the patient is answering
questions. This redness is usually due to Full- or Empty-Heat of
the Heart or Lungs.
Goitre
361
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
The most common cause of goitre is Liver-Qi stagnation with
Phlegm, usually occurring against a background of Spleen-Qi
deficiency. It may also be caused by Phlegm and Blood stasis,
Liver-Fire blazing with Phlegm or Heart- and Liver-Yin deficiency
with Phlegm (
Fig. 10.2
 
).
FIG. 10.2
 
Goitre
Pulsation Of The Carotid Artery
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
Normally, carotid pulsations may be visible just medial to the
sternocleidomastoid muscles, but ‘pulsation of the carotid artery’
signifies an excessive pulsation that is clearly visible. This may
indicate either Water overflowing to the Heart or chronic Phlegm
in the Lungs.
362
Observation Of The Pharynx
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
To observe the pharynx, ask the patient to open the mouth; press
the tongue down firmly with a disposable tongue blade, far
enough back to get a good view of the pharynx but not so far as to
cause gagging. Simultaneously ask the patient to say ‘ah’ or to
yawn. Inspect the palate, the tonsils and the pharynx at this time
(
Fig. 10.3
 
).
FIG. 10.3
 
Pharynx
The pharynx should always be observed when a patient
complains of acute or chronic ‘sore throat’: if the pharynx mucous
membrane is red, it indicates Heat or Empty-Heat. In the many
cases when patients complain of sore throat but there is no
redness of the pharynx, the cause is often either stagnation of Qi
(of the Liver or Lungs) or Yin deficiency (of the Lungs or Kidneys,
or both).
If the pharynx is deep red on observation, it indicates Full-Heat,
which may be exterior or interior. The inside of the throat may
become red in acute invasions of Wind-Heat affecting the Lung
channel and this is especially common in children. In interior
363
conditions, a redness of the inside of the throat may be due to Full-
Heat 
in the Lungs or Stomach and Intestines, the latter being more
common in children. If the inside of the throat is pale red, this
indicates Empty Heat affecting the Lung or Kidney channel, or
both.
Erosion, redness and swelling of the pharynx indicate Toxic
Heat; this is seen more frequently in children suffering from acute
upper respiratory infections.
Erosion, swelling and a yellowish-red colour of the pharynx,
together with foul breath and a thick-yellow tongue coating,
indicate Full Heat in the Stomach and Intestines, which, again, is
more common in children.
A chronic erosion of the pharynx that comes and goes is usually
due to Empty-Heat, which may affect Stomach, Lungs or Kidneys.
Chronic erosion and dryness of the pharynx that come and go
with greyish ulcers, no swelling and a dry but not painful throat
indicate chronic, severe Yin deficiency.
Chronic erosion of the pharynx with ulcers that have raised,
hard edges indicates Blood stasis mixed with Phlegm-Heat.
Box 10.2
 
summarizes these pharynx signs.
 
BOX 10.2
 
   
 
PHARYNX SIGNS
• 
 
Deep red: Heat (interior or exterior)
• 
 
Pale red: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Erosion, redness and swelling: Toxic Heat
• 
 
Erosion, swelling, yellowish-red: Heat in Stomach
• 
 
Chronic erosion that comes and goes: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Chronic dryness and erosion with greyish ulcers:
severe Yin deficiency
• 
 
Chronic erosion with ulcers that have raised, hard
edges: Blood stasis with Phlegm-Heat
Swollen Tonsils
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Swollen tonsils of a normal colour indicate retention of
Dampness or Phlegm occurring against a background of Qi
364
deficiency. This is seen frequently in children with retention of a
residual pathogenic factor (e.g. Dampness or Phlegm) after
repeated acute upper respiratory infections. If both tonsils are
affected, it generally indicates a greater severity than if only one is
affected.
A chronic swelling of the tonsils in children is often
accompanied by a chronic swelling of the adenoids, itself also a
sign of retention of residual Dampness or Phlegm.
Abnormal Tonsils Colour
Red and swollen tonsils
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Red and swollen tonsils indicate Heat or Toxic Heat often in the
Stomach or Large Intestine channel, or both. The tonsils should
always be inspected in acute invasions of Wind-Heat, particularly
in children. Red 
and swollen tonsils are frequently seen in children
during acute upper respiratory infections. During acute invasions
of Wind-Heat, a swelling and redness of the tonsils indicate a more
severe degree of Wind-Heat and often the presence of Toxic Heat;
they also point to an involvement of the Stomach or Large
Intestine channel, or both, and tell us that the child has probably a
pre-existing condition of Heat, often Stomach-Heat.
Chronic redness and swelling of the tonsils that come and go
indicate either chronic Heat in the Stomach or Large Intestine
channel, or both (more common in children and often due to a
residual pathogenic factor), or Empty-Heat in the Lung channel. In
both cases, the swelling and redness may be intermittent and less
pronounced than in acute cases. Chronic redness and swelling of
the tonsils used to be called ‘milky moth’ (
ru e
 
) when they
resemble the wings of a moth and have a milky fluid on them.
If both tonsils are affected, it generally indicates a greater
severity than if only one is affected.
Red and swollen tonsils with exudate
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Red and swollen tonsils with exudate, usually seen during acute
upper respiratory infections and more common in children,
365
definitely indicate an invasion of Wind-Heat (as opposed to Wind-
Cold), and this may be complicated by Toxic Heat in the Stomach
or Large Intestine channel, or both.
A swelling of the tonsils from Toxic Heat was called ‘stone moth’
(
shi e
 
) because the two tonsils look like the wings of a moth and
have the hardness of a stone. If both tonsils are affected, it
generally indicates a greater severity than if only one is affected.
Greyish tonsils
Greyish tonsils are often seen at the acute stage of glandular fever
(mononucleosis).
Box 10.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying tonsils signs.
 
BOX 10.3
 
   
 
TONSILS SIGNS
• 
 
Swollen, normal coloured: retention of Dampness or
Phlegm with Qi deficiency
• 
 
Red and swollen: Heat or Toxic Heat in Stomach/Large
Intestine channel
• 
 
Red and swollen during an invasion of Wind-Heat:
severe Wind-Heat with toxic heat
• 
 
Chronic redness and swelling: chronic Heat in the
Stomach/Large Intestine, Empty-Heat in the Lung
channel
• 
 
Greyish: acute glandular fever
NECK
Neck Length
Long neck
A long neck is generally a sign of a good hereditary constitution
(
Fig. 10.4
 
).
366
FIG. 10.4
 
Long neck
Short neck
A short neck may indicate a weak hereditary constitution of the
Spleen and Kidneys (
Fig. 10.5
 
).
367
FIG. 10.5
 
Short neck
Rigidity Of The Neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
This term refers not to the patient’s subjective sensation but
rather to a neck that looks rigid on observation and feels hard on
palpation. Rigidity of the neck may be due to Cold in the channels
as it occurs in 
Painful Obstruction Syndrome. It may also be due to
a Liver pattern and especially Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Yang
rising or Liver-Wind.
Soft Neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
A neck with muscles that look soft and feel soft on palpation
generally indicates severe deficiency of Qi and Blood or deficiency
of Kidney-Yang.
368
Deviated Neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
A deviated neck (leaning to one side) is due either to a weak
hereditary Kidney constitution or to severe stagnation of Liver-Qi
(
Fig. 10.6
 
).
FIG. 10.6
 
Deviated neck
Neck Width
Wide neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
A wide neck may indicate Qi stagnation with Phlegm, Phlegm
with Blood stasis, or Liver-Fire (
Fig. 10.7
 
).
369
FIG. 10.7
 
Wide neck
Thin neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
A thin neck may indicate a severe deficiency of Qi and Blood or
chronic Yin deficiency (
Fig. 10.8
 
).
370
FIG. 10.8
 
Thin neck
This is often seen when the patient, who is usually an elderly
man, has the Chinese disease symptom of 
ye ge
 
(‘diaphragm
choking’). The patient will be suffering weight loss, exhaustion,
difficulty in swallowing, and will feel as if food is stuck between
the throat and the diaphragm.
Swollen Neck Glands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Figure 10.9
 
shows the location of the neck glands.
371
FIG. 10.9
 
Neck glands
An acute swelling of the glands of the neck is usually due to an
invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat; in other words a swelling
of the neck glands during an invasion of Wind-Heat indicates that
there is also Toxic Heat. This is common, for example, in the acute
stage of glandular fever (mononucleosis). In chronic conditions, a
swelling of the glands of the neck may also indicate Toxic Heat but
one that generally occurs against a background of Qi or Yin
deficiency, or both.
In chronic cases, a swelling of the glands of the neck may be due
to Toxic Heat with Blood stasis, or to Phlegm (
Fig. 10.10
 
).
372
FIG. 10.10
 
Swollen neck glands
373
CHAPTER 11
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE BACK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BACK
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
SPINAL CURVE ABNORMALITIES
Spine bent forward
Scoliosis
Lordosis
Kyphosis
Flattening of lumbar spine
List of spine
SKIN SIGNS
Spots on the back
Vesicles on the lower back
Dryness and redness of the skin of the lower
back
374
Yellow colour of the lower back
Skin marks on the lower back
Boils on BL-23 Shenshu
Papules or pustules on the buttocks
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BACK
The upper back is influenced by the Governing Vessel and by the
Bladder and Lung channel; the lower back is influenced by the
Governing Vessel and the Bladder and Kidney channels. In more
detail, the pathways of the channels flowing through the back are
as follows (
Fig. 11.1
 
):
375
FIG. 11.1
 
Channels flowing through the back
 
• 
 
The Bladder Main channel flows twice over the back.
• 
 
The Bladder Divergent channel ascends along the
spine.
• 
 
The Bladder Muscle channel flows through the
muscles alongside the spine.
• 
 
The Kidney Main channel enters the sacrum and
flows through the lumbar spine.
• 
 
The Kidney Divergent channel ascends alongside the
spine and connects with the Girdle Vessel at the level of
BL-23 Shenshu.
• 
 
The Kidney Connecting channel spreads into the
lumbar vertebrae.
376
• 
 
The Kidney Muscle channel ascends alongside the
spine.
• 
 
The Governing Vessel ascends over the spine and a
branch enters the sacrum and the lumbar vertebrae.
• 
 
The Governing Vessel Connecting channel connects
with the Bladder channel and spreads through the
spine.
• 
 
The Spleen Muscle channel adheres to the spine.
Box 11.1
 
summarizes the channels influencing the back.
 
BOX 11.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE BACK
• 
 
Governing Vessel
• 
 
Bladder
• 
 
Lung (upper back only, through the Large Intestine
Divergent channel)
• 
 
Kidneys
• 
 
Spleen (Muscle channel)
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG
THE SPINE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Atrophy of the muscles along the spine indicates a Spleen
deficiency because the Spleen nourishes all muscles but it also has
a direct influence on the spine.
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Rigidity of the lower back indicates either retention of Damp-
Cold in the lower back or Blood stasis.
377
SPINAL CURVE ABNORMALITIES
Spine Bent Forward
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Bending forward of the spine indicates a hereditary Kidney-
Essence deficiency, a deficiency of Marrow and a weakness of the
Governing Vessel.
Scoliosis
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Scoliosis is an abnormal lateral curvature of the spine (
Fig. 11.2
 
).
Congenital scoliosis is always due to a deficiency of Kidney-
Essence. Acquired scoliosis is due either to a Kidney deficiency
with Blood stasis or to retention of Wind-Dampness in the
channels of the back.
FIG. 11.2
 
Scoliosis
Lordosis
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
378
Lordosis is an accentuation of the normal lumbar curve (
Fig. 11.3
). Congenital lordosis is due to a deficiency of Kidney-Essence,
while acquired lordosis may be due to a deficiency of the Stomach
and Spleen, retention of Wind-Dampness in the channels of the
back, or a deficiency of Yin of the Liver or Kidneys.
FIG. 11.3
 
Lordosis
Kyphosis
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Kyphosis is a rounded convexity of the spine and upper back at
the level of the thoracic vertebrae (
Fig. 11.4
 
). It is common in the
elderly, more so in women. Kyphosis 
indicates a decline of Kidney-
Essence; in young people it indicates a congenital deficiency of
Kidney-Essence.
379
FIG. 11.4
 
Kyphosis
Flattening Of Lumbar Spine
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Flattening of the lumbar spine consists in a decreased lumbar
curve (
Fig. 11.5
 
). It is often due to a pronounced spasm of the
lumbar muscles and decreased spinal mobility; it may suggest the
possibility of a herniated lumbar disc. The cause may be Liver-Qi
stagnation, Liver-Blood stasis or Cold in the lower back.
380
FIG. 11.5
 
Flattening of lumbar spine
List Of Spine
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 67
A list is a lateral tilt of the spine (
Fig. 11.6
 
). When a plumb line
dropped from T1 falls to one side of the gluteal cleft, a list is
present. This may be due to a herniated disc or to spasm of the
paravertebral muscles. It usually indicates Qi stagnation, Blood
stasis or Damp-Cold in the lower back.
381
FIG. 11.6
 
List of spine
Box 11.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying spinal curve
abnormalities.
 
BOX 11.2
 
   
 
SPINAL CURVE
ABNORMALITIES
• 
 
Spine bent forward: hereditary Kidney-Essence
deficiency, deficiency of Marrow, weakness of Governing
Vessel
• 
 
Congenital scoliosis: Kidney-Essence deficiency
• 
 
Acquired scoliosis: Kidney deficiency with Blood
stasis, retention of Wind-Dampness in back channels
• 
 
Congenital lordosis: Kidney-Essence deficiency
• 
 
Acquired lordosis: Stomach and Spleen or
Liver/Kidney-Yin deficiency, retention of Wind-
Dampness in back channels
• 
 
Kyphosis: decline of Kidney-Essence in elderly,
congenital Kidney-Essence deficiency in young
• 
 
Flattening of lumbar spine: Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-
Blood stasis, Cold in lower back
• 
 
List of spine: Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, Damp-Cold
in lower back
382
SKIN SIGNS
Spots On The Back
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Spots on the back consisting in red papules may indicate
invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat in acute cases or, in chronic
cases, Damp-Heat or Qi stagnation turning into Heat. The
diagnostic significance of such spots depends also on the location:
if they are located in the upper part of the back, in the area
between T1 and T6, they reflect a pathology of the Lungs; if they
are located in the central part of the back between T6 and T11, they
reflect pathologies of the Heart and Liver; if they are located in the
lower back, below T11, they reflect a pathology of the Kidneys.
Small, pinhead pustules, the size of millet grains, usually
indicate either Damp-Heat or Phlegm-Heat and their significance
also varies according to the location. If they are located in the
upper back, they indicate a pathology of the Greater-Yang
channels, often of external origin; if they are located in the mid
back, they indicate Heat or Toxic Heat, often from emotional
problems; if they are located in the lower back, they 
usually
indicate Empty-Heat from Kidney deficiency, often due to excessive
sexual activity.
Box 11.3
 
summarizes pathologies underlying spots and pustules
located in different positions on the back.
 
BOX 11.3
 
   
 
SPOTS AND PUSTULES ON
THE BACK
Spots
• 
 
Between T1 and T6: Lungs pathology
• 
 
Between T6 and T11: Heart/Liver pathology
• 
 
Below T11: Kidney pathology
Pustules
• 
 
Small pinhead pustules: Damp-Heat or Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Upper Back: Greater-Yang Channels
• 
 
Middle Back: Heat or Toxic Heat
• 
 
Lower Back: Kidney deficiency with Empty-Heat
383
Vesicles On The Lower Back
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Vesicles filled with clear fluid on the lower back, which look like
a string of pearls, indicate retention of Damp-Heat.
Dryness And Redness Of The Skin Of The
Lower Back
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
A red and dry macular rash on the skin of the lower back that is
itchy and hot indicates Liver- and Heart-Fire.
Yellow Colour Of The Lower Back
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
A yellow colour of the lower back with small vesicles indicates
Damp-Heat in the Spleen and Kidneys.
Skin Marks On The Lower Back
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
A discoloration of the skin of the lower back that looks like long
markings in the skin, often resembling a belt, and is neither itchy
nor painful, indicates a pathology of the Girdle Vessel and a
Kidney deficiency often due to excessive sexual activity.
Boils On BL-23 Shenshu
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
A boil on BL-23 Shenshu indicates Phlegm occurring against a
background of Kidney deficiency.
Papules Or Pustules On The Buttocks
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Papules or pustules on the buttocks indicate Damp-Heat in the
Bladder channel.
384
CHAPTER 12
 
OBSERVATION
OF WOMEN’S
BREASTS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BREASTS
BREAST SIZE
Small breasts
Breast distension
Swollen breasts
Redness and swelling of the breasts
BREAST LUMPS
NIPPLE ABNORMALITIES
Milky nipple discharge
Sticky yellow nipple discharge
Bloody discharge from the nipple
Inverted nipples
385
Cracked nipples
PEAU D’ORANGE SKIN
INTRODUCTION
The routine observation in clinical practice does not normally
include a woman’s breasts, but is carried out when a patient
reports specific breast problems such as tenderness, pain or
lumps.
The symptoms and signs related to the breast are discussed in
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 88
 
.
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE
BREASTS
The channels coursing through the breasts are illustrated in 
Figure
12.1
 
.
FIG. 12.1
 
Channels coursing through the breast
As we can see, the main channels influencing the breast are the
Liver, Stomach and Penetrating Vessel: in addition, the Muscle
channels of the Heart, Pericardium and Gall-Bladder also flow
386
through the breast. In the internal anatomy of the breast, the
various structures are influenced by the following channels or
tissues:
 
• 
 
glandular lobes: Stomach channel
• 
 
milk ducts: Stomach channel and Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
nipple: Liver channel
• 
 
areola: Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
adipose tissue in breast: fat tissue (
Gao
 
)
• 
 
connective tissue compartments: Membranes (
Huang
)
• 
 
blood vessels in the breast: Penetrating Vessel.
Box 12.1
 
summarizes the channels influencing the breasts.
 
BOX 12.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE BREASTS
• 
 
Liver
• 
 
Stomach
• 
 
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Heart Muscle channel
• 
 
Pericardium Muscle channel
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Muscle channel
BREAST SIZE
Small Breasts
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
By ‘small breasts’ here is not meant breasts that are
constitutionally small but that have become small. If the breasts
become smaller, it indicates Qi and Blood deficiency or Yin
deficiency. The sagging of the breasts may indicate Stomach
deficiency or dryness of the Blood.
387
Breast Distension
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
Breast distension is both a subjective sensation and an objective
sign. The patient is uncomfortably aware of the distension of the
breasts, and this distension is visible. It is very common in
premenstrual syndrome. By far the most usual cause of this sign is
Liver-Qi stagnation. It should be remembered that Qi stagnation
can occur also in the Lungs and Lung-Qi stagnation may also cause
breast distension. A slight breast distension may also occur with a
Spleen and Kidney deficiency.
Swollen Breasts
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
A more severe stage of distension is the swelling of the breasts,
which are noticeably larger than normal and often also painful.
Swelling of the breasts is mostly due to Liver-Qi stagnation but
with concurrent Phlegm. In a few cases, it may be due to Phlegm
occurring against a background of Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Redness And Swelling Of The Breasts
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
Redness and swelling of the breasts usually indicate the
presence of Heat, often Toxic Heat, combined with either Phlegm
or Blood stasis. It is usually accompanied by breast pain and it
may correspond to mastitis in Western medicine.
BREAST LUMPS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Palpation,
 
Chapter 51
 
; 
Symptoms and
Signs,
 
Chapter 88
There are four broad categories of breast lumps in Western
medicine: cysts, fibroadenomas, breast nodularity or carcinoma of
the breast.
Cysts
 
Also called fibrocystic disease, these constitute the most
common benign condition of the breast. They are usually bilateral
388
and they feel soft and moveable on palpation. From the Chinese
point of view, they are usually due to Phlegm. Cysts are most
common between the ages of 30 and 50.
Fibroadenoma
 
This is the next most common benign breast
disease, and occurs most often in young women. The adenoma is
usually a single, unilateral lump and, on palpation, it feels harder
than a cyst. From the Chinese point of view, it is due either to
Blood stasis or to a combination of Blood stasis and Phlegm.
Fibroadenomas are most common between the ages of 20 and 30.
Breast nodularity and tenderness
 
These occur in the breast
before menstruation and usually decrease after the period. From
the Chinese point of view, breast nodularity is due to a
combination of Liver-Qi stagnation and Phlegm. It is most
common between the ages of 30 and 50.
Carcinoma of the breast
 
This usually presents with a single,
painless, unilateral, immoveable, hard lump with indistinct
margins. Its incidence is highest after the age of 50. It is nearly
always due to a combination of Phlegm and Blood stasis occurring
against a background of disharmony of the Penetrating and
Directing Vessels. In carcinoma of the breast, there may be Toxic
Heat in addition to Phlegm and Blood stasis. Phlegm is usually
manifested by a Swollen tongue with sticky coating, and Blood
stasis by a Purple colour on the breast areas of the tongue (
Fig.
12.2
 
) and Toxic Heat by a Red tongue with a thick, dry, dark-yellow
coating and red points.
389
FIG. 12.2
 
Areas corresponding to the breast on the tongue
The three most common patterns leading to the formation of
breast lumps (benign or malignant) are Qi stagnation, Blood stasis
and Phlegm, but the first of these, Qi stagnation, usually
accompanies the second and third as well. In Chinese medicine
the Qi stagnation that leads to the formation of breast lumps is
usually considered to be the result of emotional stress; this may be
Liver-Qi stagnation, caused by such emotions as anger, resentment
or repressed frustration, or Lung-Qi stagnation caused by sadness,
worry or grief. Both conditions affect the breast and may lead to
the formation of lumps.
 
Remember
 
: Qi stagnation affecting the breast may
derive not only from the Liver but also from the Lungs.
Case history 12.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying a breast lump.
 
Case History 12.1
A 39-year-old woman had been suffering from a lump
in the left breast (upper-left quadrant) for 5 years: the
size of the lump had varied in relation to her menstrual
cycle, increasing slightly before the period and
decreasing afterwards. The lump was sometimes also
painful. A biopsy, mammogram and MRI scan had
confirmed the absence of any malignancy. The lump
was neither a fibroadenoma nor a cyst and had been
390
described simply as ‘breast tenderness and nodularity’.
On palpation, the lump was firm but not too hard,
elongated and mobile. There was no lymph node
involvement in the axilla.
Her periods were regular, not painful, not too heavy
or scanty; she did suffer from premenstrual distension
of the breasts and abdomen. She had no other
symptoms, apart from a tendency to loose stools.
On observation, her complexion was dull and sallow
and her eyes were slightly ‘staring’; there was also a
horizontal red vein starting from the outer corner of the
left eye and reaching the edge of the pupil (
Fig. 12.3
 
;
see also 
Plate 12.1 on p. P8
 
). In addition, the white
under the pupil was visible (this is not normally
visible).
FIG. 12.3
 
Horizontal vein in the eye
Her tongue was Red on the sides and tip, had a
yellow coating and teeth marks in the left breast area
(
Fig. 12.4
 
). Her pulse was Slippery on the whole, the left
side was Slippery and Wiry, especially so on the Liver
position, while the left-Front position was
relativelyOverflowing; the pulse was also slightly Rapid
(84).
391
FIG. 12.4
 
Teeth marks in the left breast area
Diagnosis:
 
In breast lumps, the most common
pathogenic factors are Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood
stasis and Phlegm appearing in varying combinations.
In this case, there are signs of all three patterns. There
is Liver-Qi stagnation because of the premenstrual
distension, the varying size of the lump in relation to
the menstrual cycle and the Wiry pulse. There is Liver-
Blood stasis because the lump is firm and slightly
painful and the pulse is Wiry. There is Phlegm because
the pulse is Slippery. Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-
Blood stasis are the predominant patterns compared
with Phlegm. The chronic Liver-Qi stagnation has given
rise to Liver-Heat and Heart-Heat, as evidenced by the
Red sides and tip on the tongue: this is also confirmed
by the rapidity of the pulse and the Overflowing quality
on the Heart pulse.
The teeth marks in the left breast area on the tongue
indicate that the breast pathology occurs against a
background of Spleen-Qi deficiency, which is also
confirmed by the tendency to loose stools. The slightly
staring look of the eyes indicates that the Mind and
Spirit are disturbed from emotional problems which,
on interrogation, she confirmed having. The showing of
the white under the pupil is generally a poor prognostic
sign. The red vein in the left eye was in the Heart and
Lung area and in the lower part of the sclera
392
corresponding to the chest.
 
1
Box 12.2
 
summarizes the factors underlying breast lumps.
 
BOX 12.2
 
   
 
FACTORS IN BREAST LUMPS
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Phlegm
NIPPLE ABNORMALITIES
Milky Nipple Discharge
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 88
A milky nipple discharge is usually due to a deficiency
condition: it may be a severe deficiency of Qi and Blood, or a
deficiency of Spleen- and Kidney-Yang; in some cases, it may also
be due to Liver-Qi stagnation.
Sticky Yellow Nipple Discharge
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 88
A sticky-yellow nipple discharge is due either to Damp-Heat in
the Liver channel or to Toxic Heat. In Western medicine, this may
be caused by duct ectasia or epithelial hyperplasia.
Bloody Discharge From The Nipple
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
As in all forms of bleeding, the two main causes are either
Blood-Heat or Qi not holding Blood. In cases of a bloody discharge
from the nipple, Toxic Heat is a common cause, especially in acute
conditions. In chronic conditions, stagnant Liver-Qi turning into
Heat may also cause an intermittent bloody nipple discharge. As
for Deficiency conditions, a deficiency of the Liver and Kidneys
393
and of the Penetrating Vessel may cause an intermittent bloody
nipple discharge with pale blood.
Box 12.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying nipple discharges.
 
BOX 12.3
 
   
 
NIPPLE DISCHARGES
• 
 
Milky: Qi and Blood deficiency, Spleen- and Kidney-
Yang deficiency, Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Sticky yellow: Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat in the Liver
channel
• 
 
Bloody: Blood-Heat, Toxic Heat, Qi deficiency,
stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat, deficiency of Liver
and Kidneys
Inverted Nipples
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
The inverting of a nipple is usually caused by complex
pathologies; it may be due to Liver-Qi and Liver Blood stagnation
combined with Phlegm, or to Toxic Heat in the Blood combined
with Blood stasis. From a Western medicine perspective, an
inverted nipple may indicate an advanced stage of carcinoma of
the breast.
Cracked Nipples
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
Cracked nipples may be caused either by stagnant Liver-Qi
turning into Fire or by Liver-Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat.
PEAU D’ORANGE SKIN
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 88
‘Peau d’orange’ refers to the appearance of an area of the breast
that is covered with small dimples so that its texture resembles the
rind of an orange. This may be due to Liver-Qi and Liver-Blood
stagnation combined with Phlegm, or to Toxic Heat in the Blood
combined with Blood stasis. From a Western medicine perspective,
394
peau d’orange may indicate an advanced stage of carcinoma of the
breast.
NOTES
1. 
See Maciocia, G. The Foundations of Chinese Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999; 147.
395
CHAPTER 13
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE
HEARTBEAT
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED DOWNWARDS
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED UPWARDS
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE LEFT
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE RIGHT
HEARTBEAT BELOW THE XYPHOID PROCESS 128
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the heartbeat refers to observation of the pulsation
of the left ventricle. In surface anatomy the left ventricle of the
heart forms the organ’s left border and produces the apical
impulse, that is, the heart systolic beat, which can be felt in the
fifth intercostal space, 7 to 9 centimetres from the midsternal line
and either on the midclavicular line or just medial to it (
Fig. 13.1
 
).
396
Although the pulsation of the left ventricle can always be felt on
palpation, it cannot be observed under normal circumstances: it is
only when there is a pathological state of the heart that the beat
becomes visible on observation. Tangential lighting helps to detect
an abnormal pulsation.
FIG. 13.1
 
Location of the apical beat
The pulsation of 
Xu Li
The heartbeat of the left ventricle, which can be felt in the fifth
intercostal space, was called 
Xu Li
 
in ancient Chinese medicine,
which is another name for the Great Connecting channel of the
Stomach. This channel cuts through the diaphragm and the lungs
and exits below the left breast producing the heartbeat. It is also
said to be the area where the Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
) converges.
The Gathering Qi itself is said to govern the two channels.
The 
Xu Li
 
is described in 
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’,
which says: 
‘
The Great Connecting channel of the Stomach is called
Xu Li. It cuts through the diaphragm and connects with the lungs, it
exits below the left breast and its beat is the beating of the
Gathering Qi
 
.’
 
1
 
It is interesting therefore that, although the
pulsation in the fifth intercostal space is obviously the pulsation of
the left ventricle, in Chinese medicine it is also related to the
Stomach and for this reason the Stomach channel has an
important influence on the heart (both in a Chinese and a Western
sense) and especially the heart rhythm. Besides the Stomach, the
apical beat is also related to the Lungs, as it reflects the ‘beating’ of
397
the Gathering Qi.
As mentioned above, if the heartbeat in the fifth intercostal
space can be observed, it indicates an abnormal state of the heart
by definition.
A more detailed description of the symptoms and signs related
to each pattern will be given in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 63
 
.
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED
DOWNWARDS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
When displaced downwards, the heartbeat can be observed in
the sixth intercostal space. From the Western medical point of
view, this may be caused by hypertension, congenital heart
disease, myocarditis or enlargement of the heart in heart failure.
From a Chinese perspective, the most likely patterns to appear
in the above heart conditions are Qi deficiency with Blood stasis,
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency (especially in the elderly),
Phlegm-Fluids obstructing the Heart or Toxic Heat invading the
Heart.
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED UPWARDS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
When the heartbeat is displaced upwards, it can be observed in
either the fourth or the third intercostal space. From the Western
medical point of view this may be caused by hypertension, ascites,
enlargement of the right heart or a tumour in the abdominal cavity.
From a Chinese medical perspective the most likely patterns to
appear in the above conditions are Yang deficiency with Water
overflowing or Liver-Blood stasis with Water overflowing.
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE
LEFT
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
398
When the heartbeat is displaced to the left, it can be seen lateral
to the midaxillary line. From a Western medical point of view, that
may occur in pleuritis of the right side of the chest or in congestive
cardiac failure.
From the Chinese medical point of view, the most likely patterns
to appear in this condition are Phlegm-Fluids in the chest and
hypochondrium, or Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs.
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE
RIGHT
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
When the heartbeat is displaced to the right, it can be observed
medial to the midaxillary line. From a Western medical point of
view, this may be due to a congenital heart condition or pleuritis of
the left side of the chest.
From a Chinese medical point of view, the most likely patterns
to appear in this condition are Qi deficiency with Blood stasis and
Phlegm-Fluids in the chest and hypochondrium.
HEARTBEAT BELOW THE XYPHOID
PROCESS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
From the Western medical point of view, a heartbeat below the
xyphoid process may be observed in defects of the tricuspid valve,
right heart disease, emphysema or enlargement of the right heart.
From the Chinese medical point of view, the most likely patterns
to appear in these conditions are Heart-Blood stasis or Heart-Qi
deficiency.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:111 First
399
published c. 100
BC
400
CHAPTER 14
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE HANDS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale hands
Red dorsum of the hands
Red palms
VENULES ON THE THENAR EMINENCE
ATROPHY OF THE THENAR EMINENCE
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES OF THE DORSUM OF THE
HANDS
TREMOR OF THE HANDS
TINEA (RINGWORM)
THE FINGERS
Contraction of the fingers
Spoon-shaped fingers
Thin, pointed fingers
401
Swollen fingers
Cracked fingers
Thickened fingers like cocoons
Shrivelled and wrinkled fingers
DEFORMED KNUCKLES
THE PALMS
Dry, cracked, peeling palms
Sweaty palms
Hand lines
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the hands has always formed a relatively important
aspect of diagnosis and it is mentioned in several chapters of the
‘Simple Questions’ and ‘Spiritual Axis’ as well as in the
‘Discussion of Origin of Symptoms in Diseases’ (
Zhu Bing Yuan
Huo Lun,
 
AD
 
610 by Chao Yuan Fang).
 
1
 
The description of index
finger diagnosis in children was discussed by the Tang dynasty
doctor Wang Chao in the book ‘Illustrated Formula of the Water
Mirror’ (
Shui Jing Tu Jue
 
).
 
2
A more detailed description of the hand signs and symptoms
described below can be found in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 65
 
.
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Pale hands are usually due to either Yang deficiency or Blood
deficiency. Heart-Yang or Lung-Yang deficiency in particular may
cause the hands to be pale. As for Blood deficiency, pale hands are
usually caused by Heart-Blood or Liver-Blood deficiency.
402
Red Dorsum Of The Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Red dorsum of the hands is generally due to Full-Heat, in
particular of the Heart, Lungs or Stomach.
Red Palms
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Red palms are generally due to Empty-Heat, in particular of the
Heart, Lungs or Stomach.
VENULES ON THE THENAR
EMINENCE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
The thenar eminence shows the state of the Stomach. 
Chapter 10
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ relates the colour of the thenar eminence to
the state of the Stomach and says: ‘
When the Stomach has Cold,
the thenar eminence is bluish; when the Stomach has Heat, the
thenar eminence is reddish; if it is suddenly black, it indicates
chronic Painful Obstruction Syndrome; if it is sometimes red,
sometimes dark and sometimes bluish it indicates alternation of
Heat and Cold; if it is bluish and short, it indicates deficiency of
Qi
 
.’
 
3
 
Chapter 74
 
of the same book says: ‘
When the thenar
eminence has bluish venules, it indicates Cold in the Stomach
 
.’
 
4
Bluish or bluish-purple venules on the thenar eminence
generally indicate Cold in the Stomach; if they are bluish but short
they indicate deficiency of Qi or Empty-Cold from Stomach-Yang
deficiency. Reddish venules indicate either Full-Heat or Empty-
Heat (usually of the Stomach and/or Lungs), if they are reddish-
purple they may indicate Blood stasis in the Stomach; and if
yellowish-red, there is Damp-Heat in the Stomach.
ATROPHY OF THE THENAR
EMINENCE
403
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
The size and consistency of the thenar eminence are related to
the state of the Stomach. When the thenar eminence is full, the
state of the Stomach is good.
Atrophy of the thenar eminence may be due to deficiency of
Yang of the Stomach, Spleen and Kidneys, or deficiency of Yin of
the Stomach, Liver and Kidneys.
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES OF THE
DORSUM OF THE HANDS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Atrophy of the muscles of the dorsum may be due to deficiency
of Liver-Blood, deficiency of Kidney-Yin or deficiency of Qi of the
Stomach and Spleen.
TREMOR OF THE HANDS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Tremor of the hands is a sign of internal Wind, which may be of
the Full or Empty type. Internal Wind is always related to the Liver,
and Liver-Wind or Wind-Phlegm in the Liver are the most frequent
cause of tremor of the hands. Empty-Wind of the Liver causes a
fine tremor of the hands; it may derive from Blood or Yin
deficiency. Internal Wind, which may develop suddenly following a
deep shock or a great fright, may also cause tremor of the hands.
In alcoholics, a fine tremor of the hands is caused by Phlegm-
Heat. In rare cases, retention of Dampness in the muscles and
sinews of the hands may also cause a fine tremor.
Box 14.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying hand tremor.
 
BOX 14.1
 
   
 
TREMOR OF THE HANDS
• 
 
Hand tremor: Full- or Empty-Wind, most commonly
Liver-Wind or Wind-Phlegm in the Liver
• 
 
Fine tremor: Empty Liver-Wind from Blood or Yin
deficiency, retention of Dampness in the muscles and
sinews of the hands
404
• 
 
Tremor following shock or fright: internal Wind
• 
 
Fine tremor in alcoholics: Phlegm-Heat
TINEA (RINGWORM)
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 21
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 65
 
and
77
Tinea, a fungal infection of the skin, is characterized by disc-like
skin lesions with sharply defined, raised borders which expand
peripherally and clear centrally. There may be red scaling with
itching as well as vesicles. Continuous scratching may result in
lichenification (thickening and hardening of the skin). In Chinese
medicine, tinea of the hands is due to an external invasion of
Wind-Heat or Damp-Heat.
When tinea affects the nails, in Chinese medicine it is called
Goose Claw Wind.
THE FINGERS
Contraction Of The Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Contraction of the fingers with normal movement of the wrist
joint and all the joints above it is called Chicken Claw Wind. The
most common cause of this contraction of the fingers is Liver-
Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency; the Dupuytren contraction of the
ring or little finger is a typical example of it (
Fig. 14.1
 
).
405
FIG. 14.1
 
Contraction of the ring finger
Two other causes of contraction of the fingers are Cold in the
joints or stagnation of Qi from emotional problems; in the latter
case the contraction of the fingers comes and goes according to the
emotional state.
Box 14.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying contraction of the
fingers.
 
BOX 14.2
 
   
 
CONTRACTION OF THE
FINGERS
• 
 
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency (e.g. Dupuytren
contraction)
• 
 
Cold in the joints
• 
 
Contraction that comes and goes according to the
emotional state: stagnation of Qi from emotional
problems
Spoon-Shaped Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Spoon-shaped fingers (
Fig. 14.2
 
) usually indicate a Lung
pathology, which may be Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs, Phlegm-Heat
406
in the Lungs, or Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency. They are usually
seen only in patients suffering from chronic lung diseases such as
emphysema, tuberculosis (TB) of the lungs, or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. In some cases, spoon-shaped fingers may also
indicate a Heart pathology.
FIG. 14.2
 
Spoon-shaped fingers
Thin, Pointed Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Thin, pointed fingers are generally related to the state of the
Stomach (
Fig. 14.3
 
) and may indicate Cold-Dampness in the
Stomach, Damp-Heat in the Stomach or severe deficiency of
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi.
407
FIG. 14.3
 
Thin, pointed fingers
Swollen Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
The most obvious and common cause of swelling of the fingers
is Painful Obstruction Syndrome from Dampness, which may be
Cold-Dampness, Wind-Dampness or Damp-Heat. Other causes of
swelling of the fingers include Blood stasis (of the Heart or Liver)
or oedema, which, in the case of the hands, is due to deficiency of
Yang of the Lungs and Spleen. In the elderly, swollen fingers may
also be due to Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat
(
Fig. 14.4
 
).
408
FIG. 14.4
 
Swollen fingers
Box 14.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying swollen fingers.
 
BOX 14.3
 
   
 
SWOLLEN FINGERS
• 
 
Painful Obstruction Syndrome (Cold-Dampness,
Wind-Dampness or Damp-Heat)
• 
 
Heart- or Liver-Blood stasis, oedema from Lung- and
Spleen-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Blood stasis (of the Heart or Liver), oedema of the
hands due to deficiency of Yang of the Lungs and Spleen
in the elderly
Cracked Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Cracked fingers are generally due to Blood deficiency or to Blood
stasis. In some cases cracked fingers may also be due to Yang
deficiency with Empty-Cold.
Thickened Fingers Like Cocoons
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Thickening of the fingers so that they look like cocoons is due to
409
general deficiency of Qi and Blood.
Shrivelled And Wrinkled Fingers
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Shrivelled and wrinkled fingers indicate a severe loss of fluids
such as that which occurs after profuse sweating, vomiting, or
diarrhoea.
DEFORMED KNUCKLES
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Deformed knuckles are seen in the late, chronic stages of Painful
Obstruction Syndrome with Phlegm. In chronic Painful
Obstruction Syndrome, there is a severe disruption of the
transformation and movement of the fluids in the joints which,
under the ‘steaming’ action of Heat, creates Phlegm in the joints.
Thus, Phlegm is the central pathogenic factor causing deformed
knuckles; it may be combined with other conditions such as Heat,
Cold, Blood stasis or Qi or Yin deficiency, or both (
Fig. 14.5
 
).
FIG. 14.5
 
Deformed knuckles
410
THE PALMS
Dry, Cracked, Peeling Palms
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Dry, cracked and peeling palms are generally due to Blood
deficiency (of the Liver or Heart, or both); if the dryness is very
pronounced and the hands are also itchy, it indicates Wind in the
skin.
Sweaty Palms
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Sweating of the palms is related primarily to the Heart and Lung
channels and may be due to either deficiency of Qi or Yin or to
Heat in one of these two organs.
Hand Lines
Changes in the lines of the palms of the hands can indicate certain
pathologies.
Description of the lines
The main hand lines to be observed are illustrated in 
Figure 14.6
 
.
The lines are the life line, the head line, the emotions line, the
health line and the so-called Jade Pillar. 
Figure 14.7
 
illustrates the
normal lengths of the emotions line and life line.
411
FIG. 14.6
 
Main hand lines
FIG. 14.7
 
Normal length of emotions and life lines
Description of abnormal signs on the lines
The abnormal signs appearing on the lines may be shaped like
stars, crosses, triangles, ovals, squares, hashes, links of a chain or
rope (
Fig. 14.8
 
).
412
FIG. 14.8
 
Abnormal signs on the lines
Diseases indicated on the lines
The diseases indicated on the lines are as follows:
Diseases of the digestive system
In ulcerative colitis, there is a star-shaped sign on the distal or
proximal end of the life line (
Fig. 14.9
 
).
FIG. 14.9
 
Signs on the life line showing diseases of the digestive
system
In gastritis, there is a star-shaped sign on the proximal end of
the life line (
Fig. 14.9
 
).
Circulatory diseases
In hypertension, the emotions line extends radially beyond its
413
natural boundary (
Fig. 14.10
 
).
FIG. 14.10
 
Lines showing hypertension
In coronary heart disease; both the emotions line and the head
line are shorter than normal (
Fig. 14.11
 
).
FIG. 14.11
 
Lines showing coronary heart disease
414
Respiratory diseases
In asthma, there are oval-shaped signs at either end of the health
line (
Fig. 14.12
 
).
FIG. 14.12
 
Signs on the health line in asthma
In TB of the lungs, there are oval-shaped signs in the middle of
the health line (
Fig. 14.13
 
).
415
FIG. 14.13
 
Signs on the health line in TB of the lungs
Diseases of the urinary system
In nephritis, urinary infections, prostatitis, or prostatic
hypertrophy, there is an oval-shaped sign at the proximal end of
the life line (
Fig. 14.14
 
).
FIG. 14.14
 
Signs on the life line in urinary diseases
416
Diseases of the reproductive system
In endometriosis, salpingitis, myomas, or ovarian cysts, there is an
arrow-shaped or oval sign at the proximal end of the Jade Pillar
(
Fig. 14.15
 
).
FIG. 14.15
 
Signs on the Jade Pillar line in gynaecological diseases
In erectile dysfunction or impotence, there are horizontal chain
links near the proximal end of the life line (
Fig. 14.16
 
).
FIG. 14.16
 
Signs on the life line in male sexual dysfunctions
Cancer
417
Here the life line is broken, is short, or merges with the health line
(
Figs. 14.17a–c
 
).
FIG. 14.17
 
(a–c) Lines in cancer
NOTES
1. 
Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang
418
Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan: Shanxi Science
Publishing House, 1995.
2. 
Sheng, Zhang Shu. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang
Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan: Shanxi Science
Publishing House, 1995.
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:129 Para 37. First
published c. 100
BC
 
.
4. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 133.
419
CHAPTER 15
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE NAILS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
SURFACE ABNORMALITIES
Ridged nails
Indented nails
Thin and brittle nails
Thickening of the nails
Coarse and thick nails
Withered and brittle nails
Withered and thickened nails
Cracked nails
Flaking nails
TWISTED NAILS
CURLING NAILS
NAILS FALLING OFF
ABNORMAL COLOUR
420
Nails with white spots
Pale-white nails
Dull-white nails
Red nails
Yellow nails
Bluish-greenish nails
Dark nails
Purple nails
LUNULAE
CORRESPONDENCE OF NAILS TO ORGAN SYSTEMS
Thumb
Index finger
Middle finger
Ring finger
Little finger
INTRODUCTION
The nails are influenced by the Liver (particularly Liver-Blood) and
they are considered to be the accumulation of the ‘excess’ of the
sinews. Normal nails should be smooth, slightly bulging, slightly
convex, relatively thick and bright. Such nails indicate a good state
of the Liver and particularly Liver-Blood.
When observing nails, one should pay attention to their texture
and colour. For example, brittle or ridged nails indicate a
deficiency of Liver-Blood.
A more detailed description of the nail signs described below
can be found in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 65
 
.
421
SURFACE ABNORMALITIES
Ridged Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Longitudinal ridges in the nails are generally due to Liver-Blood
deficiency or Liver-Yin deficiency.
Indented Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Nails take about 150–180 days to grow and horizontal
indentations may appear in the course of a serious disease. From
the location of a horizontal indentation, we can therefore gauge
roughly the time of onset of the disease. 
Figure 15.1
 
illustrates two
nails in section with two indentations corresponding to two
different times of onset of a disease, one roughly 120 days, the
other approximately 30 days.
FIG. 15.1
 
Nail indentations showing disease onset at
approximately 120 and 30 days
Apart from indicating the onset of a disease, in general terms
indentations of the nails may be due to deficiency and dryness of
Liver-Blood, general deficiency of Qi and Blood, or Heat injuring
fluids. 
Moreover, small indentations of the nails are also seen in
422
chronic skin diseases such as eczema and psoriasis, in which case
the clinical significance is different, simply indicating chronic
Liver-Blood deficiency.
Thin And Brittle Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Thin and brittle nails generally indicate Qi and Blood deficiency,
and particularly Liver-Blood deficiency. In severe cases, they may
also indicate a deficiency of Kidney-Essence.
Thickening Of The Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Thickening of the nails may be due to Liver-Fire, Liver-Blood
stasis, or Phlegm.
Coarse And Thick Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Coarse and thick nails generally indicate Qi and Blood
deficiency with Blood-Dryness generating Wind, which often
happens in chronic psoriasis. In some cases, coarse and thick nails
may indicate accumulation of Dampness.
Withered And Brittle Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Withered and brittle nails are generally due to a deficiency of
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin. In some cases, they may also be due to
Liver-Blood stasis, in which case the withering of the nails is
caused not by a lack of nourishment of Liver-Blood but by
stagnant Liver-Blood being unable to reach the nails.
In some cases, Liver-Fire may cause the nails to become
withered and brittle. If this occurs and the nails look scaly, it
indicates a severe Kidney deficiency.
Withered and brittle nails in some cases may be due to Phlegm
in the joints and this is seen in cases of chronic Painful
Obstruction Syndrome with Phlegm, in patients suffering from
423
rheumatoid arthritis. The withering of the nails observed in
psoriasis is usually due to either deficiency and Dryness of Liver-
Blood or stasis of Liver-Blood.
In acute cases, withered nails may appear in the aftermath of a
febrile disease resulting in Blood- and Yin-deficiency with Blood-
Dryness and Empty-Heat.
Withered And Thickened Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Withered and thickened nails are dry, brittle, thicker than
normal, irregular, greyish and lacking lustre. This type of nail is
generally due to a severe deficiency of Stomach and Spleen, a
deficiency and Dryness of Liver-Blood and Liver-Yin, or a
combination of Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat.
Cracked Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Cracked nails indicate either a general deficiency of Qi and
Blood or a deficiency and Dryness of Liver-Blood. In some cases,
cracked nails may be caused by Full conditions and especially by
Liver-Fire. In the elderly, cracked nails may also be due to Yin
deficiency.
Flaking Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Scaly, flaky nails indicate a Kidney and Spleen deficiency with
retention of Dampness.
Box 15.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying nail surface
abnormalities.
 
BOX 15.1
 
   
 
NAIL SURFACE
ABNORMALITIES
• 
 
Ridged nails: Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Indented nails: Deficiency and Dryness of Liver-
Blood, Qi and Blood deficiency, Heat injuring Body
Fluids
424
• 
 
Thin and brittle nails: deficiency of Liver-Blood, Qi
and Blood, or Kidney-Essence
• 
 
Thickening of the nails: Liver-Fire, Liver-Blood stasis,
Phlegm
• 
 
Coarse and thick nails: Qi and Blood deficiency,
Blood-Dryness generating Wind, Dampness
• 
 
Withered and brittle nails: deficiency of Liver-Blood
or Liver-Yin, Liver-Blood stasis, Liver-Fire, Kidney
deficiency, Phlegm, aftermath of febrile disease with
Blood-Dryness and Empty-Heat
• 
 
Withered and thickened nails: Stomach and Spleen or
Liver-Yin deficiency, Liver-Blood deficiency and Dryness,
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat
• 
 
Cracked nails: Liver-Blood deficiency and Dryness, Qi
and Blood deficiency, Liver-Fire, Liver- and Kidney-Yin
deficiency
TWISTED NAILS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Twisted nails are due to a deficiency of Liver-Blood.
CURLING NAILS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Nails may curl either down or up, like hooks, and the curling
always indicates a chronic condition with Qi and Blood deficiency
combined with Blood stasis.
NAILS FALLING OFF
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
If the nails become swollen, hot and painful, then produce pus
and later fall off, this indicates Toxic Heat, usually affecting the
Liver.
425
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Nails With White Spots
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Nails with white spots indicate Qi deficiency.
Pale-White Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Pale-white nails are generally due to Blood deficiency of the
Liver and Spleen.
Dull-White Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Dull-white nails are generally due to Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency, or to a sudden loss of Body Fluids such as happens in
profuse vomiting, diarrhoea or sweating.
Red Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Red nails are simply due to Heat, and generally to Full-Heat,
which may be related to any organ.
Yellow Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Yellow nails indicate Damp-Heat, which may be affecting the
Stomach and Spleen or Liver and Gall-Bladder. If the colour is
fresh yellow, it is a favourable sign: either the Damp-Heat is not
serious or it is receding. If it is a dull and dark yellow, the Damp-
Heat is serious or is advancing.
Bluish-Greenish Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Bluish nails indicate Blood deficiency with internal Cold, while
greenish nails (generally seen only in children’s diseases) indicate
426
severe Spleen-Qi deficiency with internal Wind. Bluish-greenish
nails may also be due to Blood stasis.
Dark Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Dark nails generally indicate either a Kidney deficiency, which
may be of Yin or Yang, or Blood stasis.
Purple Nails
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Purple nails generally indicate Blood stasis of the Liver. If the
nails are reddish-purple in febrile diseases this indicates Heat at
the Blood level.
Box 15.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal nail colour.
 
BOX 15.2
 
   
 
NAIL COLOURS
• 
 
White spots: Qi deficiency
• 
 
Pale white: Blood deficiency of the Liver and Spleen
• 
 
Dull white: Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency,
sudden loss of Body Fluids
• 
 
Red: Heat, generally Full-Heat
• 
 
Yellow: Damp-Heat of Stomach and Spleen or Liver
and Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Bluish: Blood deficiency with internal Cold
• 
 
Greenish: severe Spleen-Qi deficiency with internal
Wind (generally only in children)
• 
 
Bluish-greenish: Blood stasis
• 
 
Dark: Kidney-Yin or -Yang deficiency, Blood stasis
• 
 
Purple: Liver-Blood stasis
• 
 
Reddish-purple in febrile disease: Heat at the Blood
level
LUNULAE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
427
The lunulae are the white ‘crescents’ visible at the base of the
nails. Generally speaking, their visible presence on the thumb and
fingers indicates good health; according to some doctors, the little
finger does not normally have a lunula.
Generally speaking, the nail bed (being red) reflects the state of
Yang-Qi, while the lunula, being white, reflects the state of Yin and
Essence. In men, the lunula of the thumb should be roughly 3 mm
wide, decreasing proportionately on the index, middle and ring
fingers and usually not showing at all on the little finger. In
women, the lunulae are generally smaller than in men.
The less the lunulae are visible, the poorer is the health of the
individual. Conversely, excessively large lunulae indicate a
tendency to excess of Yang and deficiency of Yin. If the lunulae
dwindle and disappear from sight, this indicates internal Cold or
Yang deficiency.
The lunula of the thumb corresponds to the Lungs, that of the
index finger to the Heart, that of the middle finger to the Spleen,
that of the ring finger to the Liver and that of the little finger to the
Kidneys (if it shows at all) (
Fig. 15.2
 
). The lunula of a particular
finger shows a Full condition of its relevant organ if it is too large
or an Empty condition if it is too small.
428
FIG. 15.2
 
Correspondence of lunulae to organs
CORRESPONDENCE OF NAILS TO
ORGAN SYSTEMS
The nails of individual fingers correspond to the state of various
organs, with a correspondence that is not always related to the
channel of that particular finger.
Thumb
The thumbnail reflects diseases of the head, including brain, eyes,
ears, nose, throat and mouth. 
Figure 15.3
 
shows the areas of the
thumbnail that correspond to the above.
429
FIG. 15.3
 
Correspondence of thumbnail areas to organs
Index Finger
The nail of the index finger reflects diseases of the Upper and
Middle Burners, including oesophagus, 
chest, breast, lungs, heart,
upper back, shoulder and throat, and also of the head, shoulder,
back, elbow and hands. The areas vary between the right and left
index finger and these are illustrated in 
Figure 15.4
 
.
430
FIG. 15.4
 
Correspondence of the nail of the index finger to organs
Middle Finger
The nail of the middle finger reflects diseases of the Middle and
Lower Burners. The nail of the right index finger reflects diseases
of the stomach, duodenum, diaphragm, liver, pancreas, kidneys
and colon, also the back and lungs. The nail of the left index finger
reflects diseases of the same organs but also includes the heart
(
Fig. 15.5
 
).
431
FIG. 15.5
 
Correspondence of the nail of the middle finger to organs
Ring Finger
The nail of the ring finger also reflects diseases of the Middle and
Lower Burners. That on the right hand reflects disease of the liver,
gall-bladder, pancreas, kidneys, small intestine, large intestine,
bladder and reproductive system, and also the knee. That on the
left hand reflects diseases of the spleen, pancreas, uterus, urinary
passages, fallopian tubes, external genitalia and anus, as well as
the kidneys, liver, small intestine, large intestine, back and knee
(
Fig. 15.6
 
).
432
FIG. 15.6
 
Correspondence of the nail of the ring finger to organs
Little Finger
The nail of the little finger reflects diseases of the ankle, feet and
metatarsal bones (
Fig. 15.7
 
).
433
FIG. 15.7
 
Correspondence of the nail of the little finger to the parts
of the body
434
CHAPTER 16
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE CHEST
AND ABDOMEN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHEST
Protruding chest
Sunken chest
Protruding sternum
Chest sunken on one side
Chest protruding on one side
Gynaecomastia
ABDOMEN
Abdominal size
Abdominal masses
Umbilicus signs
Skin signs
435
CHEST
The front of the chest is influenced by the Lung and Heart channel
and by the Directing and Penetrating Vessels; the sides of the chest
are influenced by the Gall-Bladder and Liver channels (
Fig. 16.1
 
).
FIG. 16.1
 
Chest areas
For a more detailed description of the patterns causing chest
signs, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 63
 
.
Box 16.1
 
summarizes the channels influencing the chest.
 
BOX 16.1
 
   
 
CHANNELS INFLUENCING
THE CHEST
• 
 
Lungs
• 
 
Heart
• 
 
Directing Vessel
• 
 
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Gall-Bladder (sides of chest)
• 
 
Liver (sides of chest)
Protruding Chest
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The most common cause of a protruding chest (
Fig. 16.2
 
) is
chronic retention of Phlegm in the Lungs. Other causes include
436
severe, chronic Liver-Qi stagnation or Blood stasis in the chest.
FIG. 16.2
 
Protruding chest
Sunken Chest
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The most common cause of a sunken chest (
Fig. 16.3
 
) is a
deficiency of Qi or Yin of the Lungs. A Kidney deficiency may also
cause a sunken chest.
437
FIG. 16.3
 
Sunken chest
Protruding Sternum
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The protruding sternum (
Fig. 16.4
 
) is either hereditary, in which
case it is due to a constitutional deficiency of the Lungs and
Kidneys, or it is caused by retention of Phlegm in the Lungs.
438
FIG. 16.4
 
Protruding sternum
Chest Sunken On One Side
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The chest can become sunken on one side (
Fig. 16.5
 
) either
because of a deficiency of the Lungs, specifically affecting one
lung, or because of retention of Phlegm-Fluids, often with Blood
stasis.
439
FIG. 16.5
 
Chest sunken on one side
Chest Protruding On One Side
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The chest can become protruding on one side (
Fig. 16.6
 
) from
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs, severe Liver-Qi stagnation or Heart-
Qi deficiency with Blood stasis.
440
FIG. 16.6
 
Chest protruding on one side
Gynaecomastia
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Gynaecomastia indicates a swelling of the breast in males. It
may be due to either Liver-Blood stasis or Damp-Heat in the
Penetrating Vessel.
ABDOMEN
The regions of the abdomen in Chinese medicine are shown in
Figure 16.7
 
.
441
FIG. 16.7
 
Abdominal areas
The area under the heart is the small area immediately below
the xyphoid process extending approximately 2 inches (5 cm) and
bordered by the ribs. It is influenced both by the Heart and the
Stomach channels and by the Penetrating Vessel.
The epigastrium is the area between the xyphoid process and
the umbilicus but excluding the hypochondrial area. It is related to
the Stomach and Spleen channels.
The hypochondrium includes the two areas below the rib cage
and its edges which are influenced by the Liver and Gall-Bladder
channels.
The area around the umbilicus is influenced by the Spleen,
Liver, Kidney and Small Intestine channels.
The central-lower abdominal area (
Xiao Fu
 
) is between the
umbilicus and the symphysis pubis. This area is influenced by the
Liver, Kidney, Bladder and Large Intestine channels and by the
Directing Vessel; in women, it is also influenced by the Uterus.
The lateral-lower abdominal areas (
Shao Fu
 
) are influenced by
the Liver and Large Intestine channels, and by the Penetrating
Vessel.
Observation of the abdomen is an important part of observation
in the clinic and one that should always be carried out in
conjunction with palpation of the abdomen. In particular,
observation of the abdomen is important because the epigastrium
reflects the state of Stomach and Spleen (the Root of Postnatal Qi)
and the lower abdomen that of the Kidneys (the Root of Prenatal
Qi).
442
For a more detailed discussion of the patterns involved in
abdominal signs, see 
Part 5
 
Symptoms and Signs, 
Chapter 71
 
.
Abdominal Size
Abdominal distension
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 38
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Abdominal distension is both a symptom and a sign, that is, it is
a subjective feeling of bloating but also an objective, distended
feeling of the abdomen like a drum on palpation. The distended
abdomen looks swollen and on palpation it is hard but relatively
elastic, like an inflated balloon. In severe cases, the whole
abdomen can be distended like a ball or a frog’s belly. By far the
most common cause of abdominal distension is Qi stagnation,
which is usually related to the Liver, Spleen or the Intestines.
Liver-Qi stagnation is the most common cause of abdominal
distension, which may involve both the epigastrium and the lower
abdomen. Stagnation of Qi in the Intestines will also cause
abdominal distension and in this case there will be other
symptoms such as loose stools or constipation. Spleen-Qi
deficiency may cause slight abdominal distension.
In severe cases, when the whole abdomen may look like a ball or
a frog’s belly, this may be due to Damp-Phlegm in the Lower
Burner or oedema of the abdomen.
Box 16.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abdominal
distension.
 
BOX 16.2
 
   
 
ABDOMINAL DISTENSION
• 
 
Distension of epigastrium and the lower abdomen:
Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Distension with loose stools or constipation: Qi
stagnation in Intestines
• 
 
Slight distension: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Severe distension: Damp-Phlegm in the Lower
Burner, oedema of the abdomen
443
Large abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A large, fat abdomen indicates Phlegm occurring against a
background of Spleen deficiency. Again, allowance should be made
for the Elemental type body structure: for example, a large
abdomen is relatively normal in an Earth type but not in a Metal
type.
Oedema of the abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Oedema of the abdomen is always due to a deficiency of Yang,
which may be of the Spleen or of the Kidneys, in which case the
ankles will be swollen as well.
Sagging lower abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
The sagging abdomen is usually seen in obese people; it is
swollen but soft and hangs down. If not due to obesity, the sagging
abdomen is usually seen only in the elderly and it may be due to
Damp-Phlegm in the lower abdomen or to a severe deficiency of
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang associated with Damp-Phlegm. A
sagging abdomen always involves a deficiency of the Directing and
Penetrating Vessels and a slackening of the Membranes (
Huang
 
)
and the Ancestral Muscles (
Zong Jin
 
), which are controlled by the
Penetrating Vessel.
Thin abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A thin and emaciated abdomen may indicate a severe deficiency
of Qi and Blood, which is often seen in serious diseases such as
cancer; however, it may also simply indicate the condition of Yin
deficiency. When observing the abdomen, allowance should be
made for the Elemental type body structure; for example, a thin
abdomen is relatively normal in a Metal type but not in an Earth
type.
Abdominal Masses
444
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 71
 
and
 
89
Abdominal masses are called 
Ji Ju. Ji
 
indicates actual abdominal
masses which are fixed and immovable; if there is an associated
pain, its location is fixed. These masses are due to stasis of Blood
and I call them ‘Blood masses’. 
Ju
 
indicates abdominal masses
which come and go, do not have a fixed location and are movable.
If there is an associated pain, it too comes and goes and 
changes
location. Such masses are due to stagnation of Qi and I call them
‘Qi masses’.
Actual abdominal lumps therefore pertain to the category of
abdominal masses and specifically 
Ji
 
masses, that is, Blood masses.
Another name for abdominal masses was 
Zheng Jia, Zheng
 
being
equivalent to 
Ji
 
, that is, acute, fixed masses, and 
Jia
 
being
equivalent to 
Ju
 
, that is, non-substantial masses from stagnation
of Qi. The term 
Zheng Jia
 
normally referred to abdominal masses
occurring only in women; but although these masses are more
frequent in women, they do occur in men as well.
Visible lumps in the lower abdomen are usually due to Qi
stagnation, Blood stasis, Damp-Phlegm or Damp-Heat in the lower
abdomen. As in the case of epigastric lumps, abdominal lumps
visible on observation indicate an advanced stage which is usually
seen in cancer of the uterus, large ovarian cysts or large myomas.
If due to Qi stagnation, abdominal lumps normally feel soft and
come and go with emotional moods; if due to Blood stasis they feel
hard on palpation and are usually associated with pain; if from
Damp-Heat they may also be painful and, when palpated, very
tender; if from Damp-Phlegm they feel softer than do lumps from
Blood stasis or Damp-Heat. A typical example of an abdominal
lump from Blood stasis is a myoma, while an example of that from
Damp-Phlegm or Damp-Heat is an ovarian cyst.
Box 16.3
 
summarizes the two types of abdominal masses.
 
BOX 16.3
 
   
 
TYPES OF ABDOMINAL
MASSES
• 
 
Qi (
Ju
 
or 
Jia
 
): relatively soft masses that come and go
• 
 
Blood (
Ji
 
or 
Zheng
 
): hard, fixed masses
445
Lumps in the epigastrium
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Visible epigastric lumps are usually due to Damp-Phlegm, Blood
stasis or Phlegm and Blood stasis in the Middle Burner. Obviously,
when a lump is visible on observation (rather than palpation), it is
quite advanced and is seen in serious diseases such as stomach
cancer, liver cancer, cancer of the oesophagus or enlargement of
the liver or spleen.
Small hypochondrial lumps
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Small hypochondrial lumps resembling a string of pearls
indicate Liver-Blood stasis.
Umbilicus Signs
Protruding umbilicus
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A protruding umbilicus may be due to Empty-Cold with Qi
stagnation, to Blood stasis with oedema in the abdomen, or to
severe Spleen and Kidney deficiency. Empty-Cold with Qi
stagnation is seen more frequently in children, whereas the
pattern of Blood stasis with oedema is seen more frequently in the
elderly.
Sunken umbilicus
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A sunken umbilicus may be due to Blood stasis with sinking of
Qi, or to Damp-Heat in the abdomen.
Skin Signs
Distended abdominal veins
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
From a Chinese perspective, distended abdominal veins
represent the Blood Connecting channels, which are a network of
secondary Connecting channels where the blood pools. Thus, by
446
definition, visible distended veins in the abdomen indicate a
pathology of the Blood Connecting channels and, being in the
abdomen, a pathology of the Penetrating Vessel. The Penetrating
Vessel is the Sea of Blood and controls all the Blood Connecting
channels, in particular those of the abdomen, and of the medial
sides of the legs. If the distended veins are purple they indicate
Blood stasis, if red Blood-Heat, and if bluish Cold.
Lines on the abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Lines on the abdomen are wide streaks which look like stretch
marks (indeed, stretch marks are one type of such ‘lines’). They
may be blue or purple – blue indicating Blood stasis from Cold
associated with Yang deficiency, and purple indicating Blood stasis
with Blood-Heat associated with Yin deficiency. Such lines are
frequently seen in patients who have been on oral corticosteroids
for a long time.
Maculae on the abdomen
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Maculae on the abdomen always indicate a Blood pathology,
which is Blood-Heat if they are red, Blood stasis if they are purple
and Blood-Heat with Yin deficiency if they are scarlet red.
447
CHAPTER 17
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE GENITALIA
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE GENITALIA
PUBIC HAIR
Loss of pubic hair
Excessive pubic hair
PENIS
Redness and swelling of the glans penis
Ulcers on the penis
Peyronie’s disease
Priapism
Soft and withered penis
Long penis in children
SCROTUM
Contracted scrotum
Loose scrotum
448
Scrotum drooping on one side
Swollen scrotum
Swollen and oozing scrotum
Abnormal colour
VULVA AND VAGINA
Vulvar sores
Leukoplakia
Swelling of the vulva
Prolapse of the vagina
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE
GENITALIA
The genitals are related primarily to the Liver and Kidney channels
and to the Directing, Penetrating and Governing Vessels. The Liver
Connecting channel, in particular, loops around the genitalia.
Although the influence of the Directing Vessel on the genitalia is
obvious, that of the Governing Vessel is often overlooked.
The ‘Simple Questions’ (
Chapter 60
 
) describes an anterior
branch of the Governing Vessel that flows to the external genitalia
both in men and women, and to the pubic bone and from here
ascends up the 
abdomen on the same trajectory as the Directing
Vessel (
Fig. 17.1
 
right).
 
1
449
FIG. 17.1
 
Pathways of channels influencing the genitalia
The pathways of the channels flowing through the genitalia are
as follows (
Fig. 17.1
 
):
 
• 
 
A branch of the Governing Vessels flows down to the
genitalia.
• 
 
The Kidney Main, Connecting and Muscle channels
flow through the genitalia.
• 
 
The Liver Main, Connecting, Divergent and Muscle
channels wrap around the genitalia.
(For a more detailed description of the patterns involved in the
above genitalia signs, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapters 75
 
and 
89
 
.)
PUBIC HAIR
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 75
 
and 
89
There are two items of observation regarding pubic hair:
450
 
• 
 
loss of pubic hair
• 
 
excessive pubic hair.
Loss Of Pubic Hair
Loss of pubic hair may be due to a decline of Kidney-Essence. This
decline is normal in the elderly; in younger people, it may result
from a severe Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Excessive Pubic Hair
The term ‘excessive’ here indicates not so much the quantity as the
extent of pubic hair and it refers to people whose pubic hair
occupies a large area, extending down the legs and up towards the
umbilicus. Excessive pubic hair, so defined, may be due to either
Phlegm combined with Blood stasis or Kidney-Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat.
PENIS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
 
and 
90
Redness And Swelling Of The Glans Penis
Redness and swelling of the glans penis may be due either to Toxic
Heat or to Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
Ulcers On The Penis
This condition is characterized by redness, macular spots, erosion
and oozing ulcers on the glans penis or the shaft, or both. This is
usually accompanied by pain. The main causes of this condition
are either Toxic Heat or Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
Peyronie’s Disease
Peyronie’s disease is an unnatural curvature of the penis,
451
noticeable during an erection. It may prevent a complete erection,
owing to plaque or scar tissue inside the penis, or it may render
erection painful so that intercourse is impossible.
The most common causes of Peyronie’s disease are:
 
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Dampness in the Liver channel
• 
 
Cold in the Liver channel.
Priapism
Priapism (abnormally prolonged erection) is due either to a
deficiency of Kidney-Yin with Empty-Heat or to Damp-Heat in the
Liver channel.
Soft And Withered Penis
A soft and withered penis in adults may be due to Liver-Qi
deficiency, to Kidney deficiency (either Yin or Yang), or to Phlegm
and Blood stasis in the Lower Burner.
Long Penis In Children
If a child’s penis is abnormally long, almost the size of an adult’s,
this condition may be due to a hereditary Kidney-Yin deficiency, to
sinking of Spleen-Qi, to Phlegm with Blood stasis in the Lower
Burner, or to Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
SCROTUM
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
Contracted Scrotum
The most common cause of contracted scrotum is stagnation of
Cold in the Liver channel. It may also be seen in collapse of Yin or
Yang.
452
Loose Scrotum
A loose scrotum is due either to a deficiency of the Liver and
Kidneys (usually Yang deficiency) or to sinking of Spleen-Qi.
Scrotum Drooping On One Side
A scrotum drooping on one side indicates a condition in which one
side of the scrotum is swollen when the person is standing up but
retracted when lying down; in Western medicine, this indicates
inguinal hernia. From a Chinese perspective the patterns involved
in this condition are Empty-Cold in the lower abdomen, Damp-
Phlegm in the lower abdomen, Liver-Blood stasis or Damp-Heat in
the Liver.
Swollen Scrotum
A swollen scrotum may be due to Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency, Damp-Heat in the Liver channel, sinking of Spleen-Qi,
Heart-Yang deficiency or Liver-Blood deficiency generating Empty
internal Wind.
Swollen And Oozing Scrotum
If the scrotum is swollen, red and oozing a sticky fluid, this
condition is due either to Damp-Heat or to Toxic Heat in the Liver
channel.
Abnormal Colour
Pale scrotum
A pale scrotum is due to either Spleen- or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Red scrotum
A red scrotum is due either to Damp-Heat or to Toxic Heat in the
Liver channel.
Purple scrotum
453
A purple scrotum is due either to Liver-Blood stasis or to Damp-
Heat with Blood stasis in the Liver channel.
Dark scrotum
A dark scrotum is due either to stagnation of Cold in the Liver
channel or to Kidney-Yang deficiency.
VULVA AND VAGINA
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 89
Vulvar Sores
Vulvar sores may be due to Damp-Heat in the Liver channel or to
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in the Liver channel.
Leukoplakia
Leukoplakia may be due to Damp-Heat in the Liver channel or to
long-standing Blood deficiency accompanied by Dampness.
Swelling Of The Vulva
Swelling of the vulva may be due to Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in
the Liver channel, Damp-Phlegm in the Lower Burner, or Damp-
Heat and Toxic Heat in the Liver channel.
Prolapse Of The Vagina
Prolapse of the vagina is always due to sinking of Qi, which may be
that of the Spleen or Kidneys, or both.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:320 First
published c. 100
BC
454
CHAPTER 18
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE FOUR
LIMBS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ATROPHY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
FLACCIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
RIGIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
PARALYSIS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
LIMB MOVEMENTS
Contraction of the four limbs
Convulsions of the four limbs
Tremor or spasticity of the four limbs
OEDEMA OF THE FOUR LIMBS
SWELLING OF THE JOINTS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
455
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the limbs includes observation of their skin,
muscles, blood vessels and sinews. Therefore, although the overall
condition of the limbs is related to the Stomach and Spleen,
observation of the skin, muscles, sinews and blood vessels can
reveal the state of the Lungs, Spleen, Liver and Heart respectively.
The symptoms and signs relative to the four limbs are in
Chapters 64
 
, 
65
 
and 
66
 
of 
Part 5
 
.
ATROPHY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Atrophy of the four limbs may range from a very slight thinning
of the muscles to a complete wasting of the muscles such as is seen
in the advanced stage of some neurological problems (e.g. motor
neurone disease). The most common cause of atrophy of the limb
muscles is a deficiency of the Stomach and Spleen, which results
from the Stomach’s not transporting the Food-Essences there.
Another possible cause of atrophy of the four limbs, which usually
involves the Heart, Spleen and Liver, is Qi and Blood deficiency. In
more advanced stages, atrophy of the four limbs may be caused by
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
In children, atrophy of the four limbs is due either to a
deficiency of Stomach and Spleen or to a congenital Kidney-
Essence deficiency and it is one of the Five Flaccidities seen in
children (see 
Ch. 90
 
). The Chinese name for the condition that
causes a child to have flaccid leg muscles and swollen knees is
Crane Knee Wind, which is due to a deficiency of Yin of the three
leg channels combined with invasion of Damp-Cold in the knees.
Box 18.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying atrophy of the
limbs.
 
BOX 18.1
 
   
 
ATROPHY OF THE FOUR
LIMBS
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency
456
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Kidney-Essence deficiency (children)
• 
 
Spleen-, Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Damp-
Cold in the knees (children)
FLACCIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
The term ‘flaccidity’ indicates that the muscles are flaccid, soft
and limp but not atrophied (as in atrophy of the muscles).
In acute cases, flaccidity of the four limbs may be due to
invasion of Wind-Heat in the Lungs, later becoming interior Heat
and injuring the Body Fluids of the Stomach and Spleen. In
chronic cases, the flaccidity may result from Damp-Heat affecting
the Stomach and Spleen in Full cases, or from a deficiency of the
Stomach and Spleen in Empty conditions. In severe, chronic cases,
flaccidity of the four limbs is often due to a deficiency of Kidney-
Yin.
In children under 5 years, acute cases of flaccidity of the four
limbs are due to an invasion of Wind-Heat that quickly progresses
to the Interior, turns into interior Heat and damages the Body
Fluids, which leads to malnourishment of the channels; this is the
pathology of limb flaccidity caused by infectious diseases such as
poliomyelitis. In interior conditions, flaccidity of the four limbs in
children is due to retention of Damp-Heat or to Qi deficiency with
Blood stasis occurring against a background either of poor
hereditary constitution or of poor postnatal nutrition.
Box 18.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying flaccidity of the
limbs.
 
BOX 18.2
 
   
 
FLACCIDITY OF THE FOUR
LIMBS
• 
 
Lung-Heat injuring body fluids (acute)
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen (chronic)
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency (chronic)
457
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat
• 
 
Qi deficiency with Blood stasis
• 
 
Retention of Damp-Heat
RIGIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Rigidity of the four limbs means that the patient is unable to flex
or extend the wrist, elbow, knee or ankle joints. It has many causes.
In acute cases with sudden onset, it is due to invasion of Wind;
such a rigidity is obviously of short duration and resolves itself
once the Wind has been expelled.
In interior conditions, one common cause of rigidity of the four
limbs is Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Wind in the elderly. Another is
of course seen in Painful Obstruction (
Bi
 
) Syndrome, especially
when caused by Dampness complicated by Phlegm in chronic
cases, in which case the limb rigidity is accompanied by swelling
and pain of the joints.
In the elderly, an inability to flex the joints is often due to
retention of Phlegm in the channels together with internal Wind. A
rigidity of the limbs accompanied by pain in the joints or muscles,
or both, and worsening at night, is due to Blood stasis.
In Empty conditions, rigidity of the limbs may be due to a
deficiency of Liver- and Kidney-Yin, or of Spleen- and Kidney-Yang,
and this is more common in the elderly.
Box 18.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying limb rigidity.
 
BOX 18.3
 
   
 
RIGIDITY OF THE FOUR
LIMBS
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind (acute)
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising
• 
 
Liver-Wind (elderly)
• 
 
Painful Obstruction Syndrome with Dampness
• 
 
Phlegm with internal Wind in the channels (elderly)
• 
 
Blood stasis
458
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
PARALYSIS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Paralysis of the four limbs may range from a very slight
limitation of movement, such as a tendency to drag a foot, to
complete paralysis, as is seen in hemiplegia following a fracture of
the spine.
The main causes of paralysis of the four limbs are a Stomach
and Spleen deficiency, a general deficiency of Qi and Blood and a
deficiency of Yin of the Liver and 
Kidneys. There are also Full
causes of paralysis such as retention of Dampness in the muscles
and Blood stasis.
The hemiplegia that occurs after a stroke is due to retention of
Wind and Phlegm in the channels of the limbs on one side. The
underlying pathology leading to a stroke is usually quite complex
and includes Phlegm, internal Wind and Heat, usually occurring
against a background of deficiency of Qi and Blood or of Yin.
Box 18.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying limb paralysis.
 
BOX 18.4
 
   
 
PARALYSIS OF THE FOUR
LIMBS
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dampness in the muscles
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Phlegm and internal Wind in the channels
LIMB MOVEMENTS
Contraction Of The Four Limbs
459
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
In acute cases with sudden onset, contraction of the four limbs
may be caused by invasion of Wind and this is always of short
duration and self resolving. In Full conditions, the contractions
may be caused by Dampness obstructing the muscles, or by Heat
injuring the Body Fluids of the limb channels.
In Empty conditions, the most common cause of contraction of
the four limbs is Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency. In the elderly,
a common example usually deriving from Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin
deficiency is the Dupuytren contraction, which usually involves
either the ring finger or the little finger (see 
Fig. 14.1 on p. 131
 
).
Box 18.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying contraction of the four
limbs.
 
BOX 18.5
 
   
 
CONTRACTION OF THE
FOUR LIMBS
• 
 
Acute contraction with sudden onset: invasion of
Wind
• 
 
Full conditions: Dampness obstructing the muscles,
Heat injuring the Body Fluids of the limb channels
• 
 
Empty conditions: Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dupuytren contraction of ring/little finger: Liver-
Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency (elderly)
Convulsions Of The Four Limbs
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Convulsions of the four limbs always indicate internal Wind. In
Chinese medicine, convulsions are considered to be due to the
‘shaking’ of the tendons and this is another reason why the Liver is
always involved in this pathology.
In chronic, interior conditions, internal Wind is generated as the
end result of a long pathological process, usually involving the
Liver. In acute, febrile diseases, internal Wind is generated either
directly from extreme Heat or from Yin deficiency, usually at the
Blood level of the Four Levels. Whether the origin is internal or
external, one can distinguish two types of internal Wind: one Full,
460
characterized by strong convulsions with high amplitude; the
other Empty, characterized by weak and infrequent convulsions
with small amplitude, such as twitching.
In acute febrile diseases, internal Wind can develop quickly,
even in a matter of days, when the Heat reaches the Blood level of
the Four Levels. If Heat generates Wind, this causes strong
convulsions of the four limbs. If Empty-Wind develops from Yin
deficiency (itself caused by the Heat burning up the Body Fluids),
the convulsions of the four limbs are less pronounced and may be
infrequent.
In interior conditions, convulsions or twitchings of the four
limbs are caused by internal Liver-Wind, which may derive either
from Liver-Yang rising or from Liver-Blood deficiency.
If a newborn baby suffers from slight, intermittent convulsions
but looks completely normal in between the attacks, its
convulsions are due to invasion of external Wind combined with
prenatal shock and poor hereditary constitution. The convulsions
are more likely to occur in spring and autumn and they are due to
a deficiency of the Spleen and Kidneys. Because the sinews lack
nourishment, they are easily attacked by external Wind.
Convulsions in women after childbirth (now relatively rare) are
due to Liver-Blood deficiency generating Liver-Wind.
Epilepsy is of course a type of convulsions of the four limbs due
to internal Wind. Called 
dian xian
 
, according to Chinese medicine
it is caused both by internal Wind and by Phlegm obstructing the
Mind’s orifices, and the pathology involves Liver, Spleen and
Kidneys.
Epileptic attacks during pregnancy or after childbirth are
generally due to Liver- and Kidney-Yin 
deficiency and Blood
deficiency giving rise to Liver-Wind.
Box 18.6
 
summarizes patterns underlying convulsions of the
limbs.
 
BOX 18.6
 
   
 
CONVULSIONS OF THE
FOUR LIMBS
• 
 
Convulsions in acute febrile diseases: Full- or Empty-
Wind
• 
 
Convulsions in chronic, internal diseases: Liver-Wind
from Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Blood deficiency
461
• 
 
Small, intermittent convulsions in babies: external
Wind with prenatal shock and poor constitution:
• 
 
Convulsions after childbirth: Liver-Wind from Liver-
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Epileptic convulsions: Liver-Wind and Phlegm
Tremor Or Spasticity Of The Four Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 4
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms and
Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Tremor consists in a shaking, trembling or quivering either of
the arms or the legs, or both. It ranges from a very pronounced
shaking with wide amplitude to a quiver that is so fine and in
amplitude so small that it is almost imperceptible. Tremor of the
hands is more common than tremor of the legs. The cause is
always Liver-Wind; as with convulsions, it may be either the Full or
Empty type, the former being characterized by a pronounced
shaking of the limbs and the latter by a fine tremor.
The most common cause of tremor of the four limbs, especially
in the elderly, is a combination of Liver-Wind and Phlegm affecting
the channels and sinews. Liver-Yang rising by itself may also give
rise to internal Wind and tremors. Another common cause of
tremors is Liver-Wind deriving from Liver-Blood deficiency; this is
more common in women and will cause a fine tremor. Liver- and
Kidney-Yin deficiency are also a common cause of tremors in the
elderly.
In alcoholics, a fine tremor of the hands is caused by Damp-
Heat. In rare cases, retention of Dampness in the muscles and
sinews of the hands may cause a fine tremor of the hands.
A general deficiency of Qi and Blood failing to nourish the
sinews and muscles may cause a mild, fine tremor of the limbs.
Spasticity and tremor of the limbs may also appear at the Blood
level (of the Four Levels) when the Heat generated by the febrile
disease either leads to Liver-Wind or depletes the Yin so that
Empty-Wind is generated.
Box 18.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying tremor of the
462
limbs.
 
BOX 18.7
 
   
 
TREMOR OR SPASTICITY OF
THE FOUR LIMBS
• 
 
Phlegm and internal Liver-Wind
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising generating Liver-Wind
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency giving rise to Liver-Wind
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency giving rise to Liver-
Wind
• 
 
Damp-Heat (alcoholics)
OEDEMA OF THE FOUR LIMBS
Observation,
 
Chapter 19
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms
and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
, 
65
 
, 
68
There are two types of oedema, one called ‘water oedema’ (
Shui
Zhong
 
) and the other ‘Qi oedema’ (
Qi Zhong
 
). Water oedema is
due to Yang deficiency and is always pitting oedema, that is, the
skin pits and it changes colour on pressure. Qi oedema is due to
either Qi stagnation or Dampness and the skin does not pit, nor
does it change colour on pressure.
Another classification is that of Yang and Yin oedema: the
former is of the Full type and is due to invasion of Wind,
Dampness or Toxic Heat, whereas the latter is of the Empty type
and is due to a deficiency of Spleen- or Kidney-Yang, or both. In
Yin oedema there is marked pitting on pressure, whereas in Yang
oedema there is little or no pitting. From a Western perspective,
absence of pitting indicates oedema due to hypothyroidism.
When observing the limbs for oedema, we should always
palpate the oedematous area and check whether or not the skin
pits on palpation. If pressing the skin with the thumb leaves a
dent that takes a long time to spring back, this indicates the so-
called ‘water’ oedema, that is, oedema due to retention of fluids; if
pressing the skin with the thumb forms no dent, this indicates ‘Qi
oedema’ and it is due to Qi stagnation or Dampness.
True oedema is generally due to deficient Yang; the fluids which
463
it is unable to transform, transport and excrete properly
accumulate in the space between the skin and muscles (
Cou Li
 
).
Yang deficiency is the most common cause of oedema of the
limbs: Lung-Yang deficiency affects primarily the hands, Kidney-
Yang deficiency primarily the feet and Spleen-Yang deficiency
both. Oedema of the four limbs may also derive from retention of
Dampness in the muscles, which may be associated either with
Cold or with Heat.
Qi stagnation affecting the muscles may also cause oedema of
the limbs, in which case it will be of the non-pitting type. In the
elderly, oedema of the limbs may also derive from Qi deficiency
and Blood stasis. Finally, acute oedema of the hands and face only
may be due to invasion of the Lungs by Wind-Water, which is a
type of Wind-Cold.
Box 18.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying oedema of the
limbs.
 
BOX 18.8
 
   
 
OEDEMA OF THE LIMBS
• 
 
Oedema of the hands: Lung-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Oedema of the feet: Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Oedema of the four limbs: Spleen-Yang deficiency,
Dampness
• 
 
Oedema of the four limbs (non-pitting): Qi stagnation
• 
 
Oedema of limbs in elderly: Qi deficiency and Blood
stasis
• 
 
Acute oedema of the hands: invasion of the Lungs by
Wind-Water
SWELLING OF THE JOINTS OF THE
FOUR LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
A swelling of the joints of the four limbs is always due to Painful
Obstruction (
Bi
 
) Syndrome, especially that deriving from
Dampness. In chronic conditions, Dampness develops into
Phlegm, which obstructs the joints and causes further swelling
464
and bone deformities. In adult patients, and especially women, it
is very common for Painful Obstruction Syndrome and swelling of
the joints of the four limbs to occur against a background of Blood
deficiency. If, in addition to being swollen, the joints are also red
and hot to the touch, this indicates retention of Damp-Heat.
Box 18.9
 
summarizes patterns underlying swelling of the joints.
 
BOX 18.9
 
   
 
SWELLING OF THE JOINTS
OF THE FOUR LIMBS
• 
 
Chronic swelling: Painful Obstruction (
Bi
 
) Syndrome,
especially from Dampness
• 
 
Chronic swelling with bone deformities: Phlegm
obstructing the joints
• 
 
Swelling in women: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Swollen, red joints hot to the touch: retention of
Damp-Heat
465
CHAPTER 19
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE LEGS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LEG SIGNS
Oedema
Atrophy
Paralysis
Arched legs
GAIT
Festination
Unstable gait
Staggering gait
Stepping gait
Shuffling gait
Observation of legs includes both observation of the legs
themselves and also of the gait.
466
The symptoms and signs related to the legs are in 
Chapter 66
 
of
Part 5
 
.
LEG SIGNS
Oedema
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms
and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
, 
66
 
, 
68
Oedema is generally caused by Yang deficiency of the Lung,
Spleen or Kidneys or by retention of Dampness. When oedema
affects the legs, it is due either to a Spleen-Yang deficiency, a
Kidney-Yang deficiency or a combination of the two. In some
cases, oedema may also be due to an accumulation of Dampness in
the legs, which prevents the proper transformation of fluids; in
this case, besides showing oedema, the legs will look generally
puffy. Oedema caused by deficiency of Yang or Dampness shows
pitting, that is, the skin pits on pressure. In a few cases, oedema
may be due to stagnation of Qi and Blood in the legs, in which case
it is non-pitting (
Fig. 19.1
 
).
FIG. 19.1
 
Causes of oedema of the legs
Case history 19.1
 
illustrates a pattern of Spleen- and Kidney-
Yang deficiency underlying leg oedema.
 
Case History 19.1
A 51-year-old man had been suffering from oedema of
the legs and abdomen, breathlessness, night sweating
and inability to lie down for 8 months. A Western
diagnosis revealed that he suffered from congestive
cardiac failure. He also experienced a feeling of heat in
the head and a feeling of throbbing of the head; from a
Western diagnostic point of view this was due to
467
hypertension. On interrogation, it transpired that he
also experienced a feeling of pressure in the right eye in
the morning, tinnitus, thirst and a tendency to
diarrhoea.
He was slightly overweight and his body shape was of
the Fire type, having a relatively round body shape,
round head and small hands and feet. However, the Fire
type should walk briskly and talk fast, whereas this
patient walked and talked rather slowly. His complexion
was dull pale.
His tongue was very slightly Pale, very slightly Red on
the sides with a deep Heart crack and a sticky-white
tongue coating. His pulse was Weak on both Rear
positions, but especially on the right, Weak on the right
Front position and Slippery on the left Front position.
Diagnosis
 
: First of all, the contradiction between the
Fire body shape and his slow walk and talk indicates
straight away a potential problem in the Fire Element
and the Heart. This is confirmed by the presence of the
deep Heart crack on the tongue, which usually indicates
either severe emotional problems (which was not the
case in this patient) or a heart problem. The heart
problem is also confirmed by the Slippery quality on
the Heart position, which is all the more striking
considering the Weak quality of most of the other
pulses. When only the Heart pulse is Slippery,
especially in its lateral or medial aspects, this often
indicates the possibility of heart disease in a Western
sense. Thus, in this patient, the contradiction between
the body type and his walking and talking, the pulse
and the tongue all clearly indicate the possibility of an
actual heart disease, which was of course confirmed by
the Western diagnosis.
In terms of patterns, there is a deficiency of Spleen-
and Kidney-Yang manifested by the tinnitus, tendency
to diarrhoea and Weak pulse on both Rear positions,
with Water overflowing to the Heart, which is
manifested by the oedema, breathlessness and inability
468
to lie down. In addition to these two patterns there is
also Liver-Yang rising (stemming from the Kidney
deficiency) manifesting with a feeling of heat and
throbbing of the head, thirst, pressure in the eye and
Red sides of the tongue.
Atrophy
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of atrophy of the legs is a chronic
deficiency of the Stomach and Spleen. Another cause is a
deficiency of Yin of the Liver and Kidneys (more common in the
elderly).
Paralysis
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Paralysis of the legs may be due to chronic Stomach- and Spleen-
Qi deficiency, to Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency or to Wind-
Phlegm in the limbs. The first two patterns are seen in
neurological conditions and the third is seen in the sequelae stage
of Wind-stroke.
Arched Legs
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Arched legs, which may be bowed outward or inward, in
children are due to a congenital deficiency of the Liver and
Kidneys, or of the Stomach and Spleen (
Fig. 19.2
 
).
469
FIG. 19.2
 
Arched legs
GAIT
Festination
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Festination refers to a walk characterized by leaning forwards
almost to the point of falling, so that the patient needs to take
quick and small steps. Once the patient starts walking it is difficult
to stop. The causes of this way of walking are usually a severe,
chronic deficiency of Liver- and Kidney-Yin or a severe deficiency
of Qi and Blood, in both cases with internal Wind.
Unstable Gait
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The unstable gait is characterized by the patient raising the leg
very high and dropping it suddenly; the paces are wide, the walk is
unstable and such patients will fall easily if they close their eyes.
They lose balance also when they are standing. This gait is due to a
chronic and severe Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency or a severe
deficiency of Qi and Blood, in both cases with internal Wind.
470
Staggering Gait
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The staggering gait consists in swaying from side to side when
walking, as if in a state of drunkenness. This gait may be due to
Phlegm and Blood stasis obstructing the legs, or to a severe
deficiency of Kidney- and Liver-Yin.
Stepping Gait
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The stepping gait consists in the patient raising the leg high and
dropping the foot with the toes only touching the ground as if
stepping over an obstacle. This type of gait is due to a severe
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency or Qi and Blood deficiency, in
both cases with internal Wind.
Shuffling Gait
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The shuffling gait consists in the patient not lifting the feet up
when walking. It is due to a severe deficiency of Liver- and Kidney-
Yin, often combined with Wind-Phlegm. This gait is commonly
seen in people suffering from Parkinson’s disease.
471
CHAPTER 20
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE
EXCRETIONS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
SPUTUM
NASAL DISCHARGE
SWEAT
STOOLS
Colour
Consistency
Shape
URINE
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
Colour
Consistency
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
472
Colour
Consistency
Lochia
INTRODUCTION
Generally, the term ‘observation of the excretions’ would include
observation of urine, stools, vaginal discharge and menstrual
blood, as well as of sputum, nasal discharge and sweat. As the
doctor normally finds out about the first group of excretions
through interrogation rather than observation, the reader should
refer also to the Interrogation section, 
Part 2
 
, 
Chapters 31
 
and 
46
 
.
SPUTUM
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 38
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Sputum is always, by definition, a manifestation of Phlegm
retained in the Lungs. The colour and consistency of the sputum
give us an indication of the nature of the condition: Hot or Cold, or
Deficient or Excess.
White and dilute sputum indicates Cold-Phlegm, which is
usually associated with a Yang deficiency of the Spleen or Kidneys,
or both.
White and sticky sputum indicates Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs,
while yellow and sticky sputum indicates Phlegm-Heat in the
Lungs. If yellow and sticky sputum is also purulent, this indicates
Toxic Heat in the Lungs. Very dark sputum the colour of coffee
grounds indicates Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs with a predominance
of Heat injuring the blood vessels.
Blood-streaked sputum indicates either Phlegm-Heat in the
Lungs or, if it is scanty, Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Box 20.1
 
summarizes sputum signs.
 
BOX 20.1
 
   
 
SPUTUM
• 
 
White and dilute: Cold-Phlegm
473
• 
 
White and sticky: Damp-Phlegm
• 
 
Yellow and sticky: Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Yellow, sticky and purulent: Toxic Heat
• 
 
Dark like coffee grounds: Phlegm-Heat at Blood level
• 
 
Blood streaked: Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Scanty and blood streaked: Empty-Heat
NASAL DISCHARGE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Nasal discharge may indicate either Phlegm or Dampness: for
example, a sticky-yellow nasal discharge in a person suffering from
acute bronchitis indicates Phlegm-Heat, while the nasal discharge
of a person suffering from sinusitis indicates Damp-Heat. In some
cases, it may not fall into either category but is due simply to an
impairment of the Lungs’ diffusing and descending of fluids;
examples of this are the chronic nasal discharge of allergic rhinitis
or the acute nasal discharge seen in the common cold.
Generally, a white, watery and dilute nasal discharge indicates
Cold Phlegm. Such a nasal discharge is frequently seen either in
allergic rhinitis or in the common cold: in the former case it is due
to deficient Lung-Qi failing in the diffusing and descending of the
fluids; in the latter it is due to external Wind impairing the Lungs’
diffusing and descending of fluids.
A white and sticky nasal discharge may indicate either an
external invasion of Wind-Heat or chronic retention of Dampness
in the nose and sinuses. A sticky-yellow nasal discharge indicates
chronic retention of Damp-Heat in the nose and sinuses.
A blood-streaked nasal discharge may indicate either Phlegm-
Heat in the Lungs or Damp-heat in the nose or sinuses.
Box 20.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying nasal discharges.
 
BOX 20.2
 
   
 
NASAL DISCHARGE
• 
 
White, watery, dilute: Cold-Phlegm; in rhinitis, Lung-
Qi deficiency; in the common cold, external Wind.
• 
 
White, sticky: Dampness or Wind-Heat
474
• 
 
Yellow, sticky: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Blood-streaked: Phlegm-Heat or Damp-Heat
SWEAT
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 41
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 76
Sweating is generally due either to Heat or to a deficiency (of Qi,
Yang or Yin).
Sweat that looks like drops of oil, especially on the forehead,
indicates collapse of Yang. Yellow sweat indicates Damp-Heat in
the Stomach and Spleen, while profuse, incessant sweating all over
the body indicates either Stomach-Heat in acute conditions or
severe deficiency of Yang in chronic conditions.
Sweating on the head indicates Heat or Damp-Heat in the
Stomach or Empty-Heat deriving from Kidney-Yin deficiency. In
children, sweating on the head is usually due to retention of food.
Sweating on the nose indicates Damp-Heat in the Lungs or
Stomach, or both. Sweating on the hands indicates deficiency of Qi
or Yin of the Lungs or Heart, or Heat in the Lungs or Heart.
Sweating of the palms and soles indicates Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Box 20.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying sweating.
 
BOX 20.3
 
   
 
SWEAT
• 
 
Sweat like drops of oil on the forehead: collapse of
Yang
• 
 
Yellow: Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Profuse, incessant: Stomach-Heat or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Sweating on head: Heat or Damp-Heat in Stomach or
Empty-Heat from Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Sweating on head in children: retention of food
• 
 
Sweating on the nose: Damp-Heat in the
Lungs/Stomach
• 
 
Sweating on the hands: Qi or Yin deficiency of
Lungs/Heart, or Heat in Lungs/Heart
• 
 
Sweating of palms and soles: Kidney-Yin deficiency
475
STOOLS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 31
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 72
Colour
Normal stools are light brown in colour. Pale-yellow stools indicate
Empty-Heat (of Spleen, Large Intestine or Kidneys). Dark-yellow
stools indicate Full-Heat (of the Large Intestine). Dark stools may
indicate the presence of occult blood and they generally indicate
Heat (of the Large Intestine).
Pale, almost white stools indicate Cold in the Large Intestine.
Green stools indicate Liver-Qi invading the Spleen. Red stools
indicate the presence of fresh blood and this may be due either to
Heat in the Large Intestine or to Spleen-Qi deficiency. Greenish-
bluish stools indicate the penetration of external Cold into the
Large Intestine (common in babies). Black or very dark stools
indicate Blood stasis.
Consistency
The normal stool is well formed, not loose, not too dry and
floating.
An excessively dry stool indicates either Heat in the Intestines,
Blood deficiency (of the Liver) or Yin deficiency (which may affect
the Large Intestine, Spleen, Liver or Kidneys).
Loose stools generally indicate a deficiency of the Spleen or
Kidneys, or both. A deficiency of the Spleen is by far the most
common cause of chronic diarrhoea or loose stools; a Kidney
deficiency is a common cause of chronic diarrhoea in the elderly. If
the diarrhoea is severe and very watery it usually indi-cates Yang
deficiency (of the Spleen or Kidneys, or both), while loose stools
usually indicate Spleen-Qi deficiency.
There are, however, also Full causes of diarrhoea, which are
principally Dampness (which could be associated with Heat or
Cold) and Cold in the Spleen and Intestines.
The presence of mucus in the stools indicates Dampness while
the presence of blood indicates deficient Spleen-Qi not holding
476
Blood, Damp-Heat or Blood stasis in the Intestines.
Undigested food in the stools indicates Spleen-Qi deficiency.
Sticky stools that necessitate brushing the toilet with a toilet
brush every time indicate Dampness in the Intestines.
Shape
Stools like small pellets indicate Liver-Qi stagnation or Heat if they
are also dry. Long and thin stools like pencils indicate Spleen-Qi
deficiency (but bear in mind that they could also indicate
carcinoma of the bowel). (See 
Figure 31.1 on p. 272
 
.)
Box 20.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal stools.
 
BOX 20.4
 
   
 
STOOLS
Colour
• 
 
Light brown: normal
• 
 
Pale yellow: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Dark yellow: Full-Heat
• 
 
Dark: Heat
• 
 
Pale: Cold
• 
 
Green: Liver-Qi invading Spleen
• 
 
Red: Large Intestine Heat or Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Greenish-bluish: Cold in Large Intestine
• 
 
Very dark, black: Blood stasis
Consistency
• 
 
Dry stools: Heat in Intestines, Blood or Yin deficiency
• 
 
Diarrhoea with mucus: Dampness in the Intestines
• 
 
Loose stools and diarrhoea: Spleen-Qi, Kidney or
Yang deficiency or Dampness
• 
 
Diarrhoea with blood: Damp-Heat or Spleen-Qi
deficiency
• 
 
Undigested food in the stools: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Mucus in the stools: Dampness in the Intestines
• 
 
Blood in the stools: Spleen-Qi not holding Blood,
Damp-Heat or Blood stasis
• 
 
Sticky stools: Dampness in the Intestine
Shape
477
• 
 
Bitty stools like pellets: Liver-Qi stagnation or Heat
• 
 
Long-thin stools like pencils: Spleen-Qi deficiency
URINE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 31
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 73
The colour of the urine gives a good indication of the Hot and
Cold condition of the patient. Normal urine is pale yellow. Pale
urine indicates Cold in the Bladder or Kidney-Yang deficiency;
dark urine indicates Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
It should be remembered that the colour of the urine is affected
when the person drinks a lot of water (becoming paler than it
would otherwise be) and also when the person takes Vitamin B,
which makes the urine bright yellow.
Blood in the urine indicates either Qi deficiency (of the Spleen
and Kidneys), Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Very dark urine, like soya sauce, indicates a kidney disease such
as kidney failure or glomerulonephritis.
Turbid urine indicates Dampness in the urinary passages. Urine
with small flakes of mucus indicates Damp-Heat in the Bladder.
Box 20.5
 
summarizes urine signs.
 
BOX 20.5
 
   
 
URINE
• 
 
Pale: Cold in the Bladder or Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Dark: Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Red (with blood): Qi deficiency, Heat in the Bladder or
Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Turbid urine: Dampness in the urinary passages
• 
 
Mucus flakes: Damp-Heat in Bladder
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
478
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 84
Colour
The colour of the menstrual blood varies slightly during the
period. In general, it is usually dark red, being lighter at the
beginning, deep red in the middle, and pinkish at the end of the
period. The following are the main patterns with regard to colour:
 
• 
 
Blood-Heat
 
: dark red or bright red
• 
 
Blood deficiency
 
: pale
• 
 
stasis of Blood
 
: blackish, very dark
• 
 
Full-Cold
 
: purplish
• 
 
Empty-Cold
 
: brownish like soya-bean sauce and
dilute
• 
 
Empty-Heat in Blood
 
: scarlet red.
Consistency
The normal flow does not coagulate and there are no clots; the
blood is neither dilute nor thick. The following are the main
patterns with regard to the consistency of menstrual blood:
 
• 
 
stasis of Blood or Cold in the Uterus
 
: clotted, with
dark, dull clots
• 
 
Heat
 
: clotted, with dark but fresh-looking clots
• 
 
stasis of Blood
 
: large clots
• 
 
Cold in the Uterus
 
: small dark clots, but blood not
dark
• 
 
Blood or Yin deficiency
 
: watery
• 
 
Dampness or Damp-Heat in the Uterus
 
: sticky.
Box 20.6
 
summarizes menstrual blood signs.
 
BOX 20.6
 
   
 
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
Colour
479
• 
 
Dark red: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Bright red: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Pale: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Dark: Blood stasis
• 
 
Purplish: Full-Cold
• 
 
Brownish and dilute: Empty-Cold
• 
 
Scarlet red: Blood Empty-Heat
Consistency
• 
 
Clotted with dark, dull clots: Blood stasis or Cold
• 
 
Clotted with dark, fresh-looking clots: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Large dark clots: Blood stasis
• 
 
Small dark clots in bright blood: Cold in the Uterus
• 
 
Watery blood: Blood or Yin deficiency
• 
 
Sticky blood: Dampness or Damp-Heat
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 89
Colour
Vaginal discharges may vary in colour from white, through yellow
or greenish to red.
White discharge is due to Cold. Cold can derive from Spleen- or
Kidney-Yang deficiency, or from exterior Cold-Dampness.
Yellow discharge indicates Heat, usually Damp-Heat in the
Lower Burner. A greenish discharge is a result of Damp-Heat in the
Liver channel, and a red and white colour also indicates Damp-
Heat.
Yellow or red discharge with white pus after menopause is due
to Toxic Heat.
Consistency
A watery discharge may indicate Cold-Dampness, or a Deficiency
480
condition, or both. A thick discharge shows Damp-Heat, or an
Excess condition, or both.
Lochia
Hearing and smelling,
 
Chapter 54
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter
87
Abundant and pale lochia generally indicate Qi deficiency;
abundant and red lochia are due to Blood-Heat or Empty-Heat in
the Blood; while abundant and dark lochia indicate Blood stasis or
Qi deficiency with 
Blood stasis. Scanty lochial discharge, if dark,
usually indicates Blood stasis; if pale, it may also be due to a severe
deficiency of Qi and Blood. A scanty lochial discharge may also be
due to Cold obstructing the Uterus.
Box 20.7
 
summarizes patterns underlying vaginal discharges.
 
BOX 20.7
 
   
 
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Colour
• 
 
White: Cold
• 
 
Yellow: Heat or Damp-Heat
• 
 
Greenish: Damp-Heat in Liver Channel
• 
 
Red and White: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Yellow-red with white pus after the menopause: Toxic
Heat
Consistency
• 
 
Watery: Cold-Dampness/deficiency
• 
 
Thick: Damp-Heat
481
CHAPTER 21
 
OBSERVATION
OF THE SKIN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Skin layers
Types of skin lesion
THE SKIN AND THE INTERNAL ORGANS
The skin and the Lungs
The skin and the Stomach and Spleen
The skin and the Kidneys
The skin and the Liver
The skin and the Heart
The skin and the Connecting channels
SKIN SIGNS
Skin colour
Skin texture
Skin of the forearm (inner aspect)
482
The space between skin and muscles (
Cou Li
 
)
Body hair
Macules, papules, vesicles and pustules
Dry skin
Greasy skin
Swelling of the skin
Scales
Erosion of the skin
Rashes
Fissures
Skin ulcers
Dermographism
SKIN DISEASES
Eczema
Acne
Psoriasis
Urticaria
Naevi
Malignant melanoma
Tinea
Candida
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster
Warts
Rosacea
483
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the skin is an important aspect of observational
diagnosis. It includes observing the skin colour, skin texture, skin
pores and the body hair as well as, of course, any abnormal
manifestations on the skin such as various skin diseases, moles,
warts or naevi.
Skin Layers
Ancient Chinese medicine had its own conception of the skin as
made up of different layers and muscles. This conception was
similar to that of modern Western medicine. The various layers
and muscles in the structure of the skin are:
 
1. 
 
Superficial layer of skin (
Fu
 
)
2. 
 
Deep layer of skin (
Ge
 
)
3. 
 
Subcutaneous muscles (
Ji
 
)
4. 
 
Fat and muscles (
Fen Rou
 
)
5. 
 
Space between skin and muscles (
Cou Li
 
)
6. 
 
Skin pores, including sebaceous glands (
Xuan Fu
 
).
Fu
 
indicates the superficial layer of skin (i.e. the epidermis),
which is influenced mostly by the Lungs. 
Ge
 
indicates the deep
layer of skin (i.e. the dermis), which is influenced by the Lungs,
Liver and Kidneys. 
Ji
 
, a word that is sometimes translated as
“flesh”, indicates the subcutaneous muscles and this structure is
influenced by the Spleen and Liver. 
Fen Rou
 
indicates two
structures, i.e. fat (influenced by the Spleen, Kidneys and
Directing Vessel) and muscles near the bones (influenced by the
Spleen and Liver). 
Cou Li
 
(therefore, the space between skin and
muscles) is 
influenced by the Lungs and Spleen.
 
1
 
Xuan Fu
 
are the
pores (including the sebaceous glands) through which the sweat
comes out and they are influenced by the Lungs and Spleen.
Box 21.1
 
summarizes the organs influencing each layer of the
skin.
 
BOX 21.1
 
   
 
ORGANS INFLUENCING
484
LAYERS OF THE SKIN
• 
 
Fu
 
: Lungs
• 
 
Ge
 
: Lungs, Liver and Kidneys
• 
 
Ji
 
: Spleen and Liver
• 
 
Fen
 
(of 
Fen Rou
 
): Spleen, Kidneys and Directing Vessel
• 
 
Rou
 
(of 
Fen Rou
 
): Spleen and Liver
• 
 
Cou Li
 
: Lungs
• 
 
Xuan Fu
 
: Lungs
Types Of Skin Lesion
Figure 21.1
 
shows the various types of skin lesions.
485
FIG. 21.1
 
Skin lesions. a, Freckle; b, papule; c, dermatofibroma; d,
vesicles; e, pustule; f, epidermal cyst; g, wheal; h, psoriasis
plaque; i, white and silvery scale; j, ulcer 
(From Gawkrodger 1992, An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, 
pp. 12–13
 
, with permission of Churchill Livingstone.)
Churchill Livingstone
486
THE SKIN AND THE INTERNAL
ORGANS
The Skin And The Lungs
As a whole, the skin is influenced by the Lungs. 
Chapter 10
 
of the
“Simple Questions” says: 
“The Lungs are connected to the skin and
control the state of the body hair”.
 
2
 
The Lungs also control the
opening and closing of the pores and this function is related to the
Lung’s diffusing of Defensive Qi to the skin. The pores were 
called
“sweat holes” (
Han Kong
 
) and their function is to discharge turbid
Qi and sweat. The Defensive Qi and, therefore, the Lung’s opening
and closing of the pores, is a manifestation of the protective
function of the Defensive Qi against the invasion of pathogenic
factors. When the Defensive Qi is properly regulated, the pores are
closed on exposure to a pathogenic factor and properly open
during exercise or on exposure to hot weather. A weakness of
Lung-Qi and of the Defensive Qi may lead to “flaccidity” of the
pores and result in their being too open: this facilitates the
invasion of pathogenic factors. In pathology, a weakness of Lung-
Qi, and therefore of the Defensive Qi in the space between the
skin and muscles, causes acute skin diseases due to invasion of
external Wind such as urticaria.
The Skin And The Stomach And Spleen
The Stomach and Spleen produce Qi and Blood and the turbid part
of Qi forms the Defensive Qi while the clear part forms Nutritive
Qi. The Defensive Qi, through the diffusing of Lung-Qi, reaches
the skin, warming it and regulating the opening and closing of the
pores. On the other hand, the Stomach fluids also reach the skin
through the diffusing of Lung-Qi, moistening it. The Stomach is
also one of the origins of Body Fluids, part of which go to the
Lungs and part of which go to the Kidneys. Kidney-Yang warms
the Body Fluids deriving from the Stomach; the turbid part is
excreted as urine and the pure part goes to the skin via the Triple
Burner and the Bladder channel in the back.
The Spleen also controls the muscles immediately below the
487
skin as well as the adipose tissue located there. In pathology, a
deficiency of the Spleen may affect these structures and cause
diseases such as scleroderma. Of course, Dampness resulting from
a deficiency of the Spleen is the cause of many common skin
diseases such as eczema, herpes, acne, etc. A failure of Spleen-Qi
in holding blood in the vessels may cause bleeding under the skin
and therefore red maculae.
The Skin And The Kidneys
The Kidneys also influence the skin in other ways. First of all,
although the Lungs diffuse Defensive Qi, and the Stomach and
Spleen contribute to Defensive Qi’s production, the Defensive Qi
stems from the Lower Burner and from the Kidneys. Defensive Qi
is Yang in nature and it is therefore influenced by Kidney-Yang and
the Fire of the Gate of Life. The Kidneys also play an important
role in the distribution of Defensive Qi to all other channels and
parts of the body with the aid of the Triple Burner and the Bladder
channel. The Back Transporting points where the Defensive Qi
infuses to the Internal Organs are situated in the back along the
Bladder channel. This is because the Defensive Qi emerges from
the Kidneys, through the Triple Burner, and flows up along the
Bladder channel. Moreover, when the Defensive Qi emerges in the
morning after flowing in the Yin organs at night, it starts from the
Kidney channel (
Chapter 76
 
of the “Spiritual Axis”)
 
3
 
(
Fig. 21.2
 
).
488
FIG. 21.2
 
Relationship between the Kidneys, Defensive Qi and
skin
Therefore, when the Kidneys are deficient, the Defensive Qi may
also be deficient. This deficiency in the skin gives rise to skin
diseases. In particular, a deficiency of the Kidneys, with its
consequent failure to irrigate the skin with Defensive Qi, is often
at the root of complex, modern skin diseases such as lupus
erythematosus or scleroderma.
Apart from a Kidney deficiency and impairment of the
Defensive Qi circulation in the skin, these diseases are often
associated with Yin Fire, that is, a pathological rise of the Minister
Fire upwards stemming from a deficiency of the Original Qi (
Yuan
Qi
 
). In such diseases, there are superficial manifestations on the
skin but the root cause is a Kidney deficiency and a deficiency of
the Original Qi; this also explains the often contradictory signs of a
red rash on the skin of the face and a Pale tongue.
The Triple Burner also influences the skin and, in particular, the
skin’s moisture, because it plays such an important role in the
metabolism of fluids. One important 
aspect of the Triple Burner, in
fact, is the diffusion of fluids in the Upper Burner, the separation
and transformation of fluids in the Middle Burner and the
excretion of fluids in the Lower Burner. As heat is needed to
transform and excrete fluids, the Triple Burner relies on that
derived from the Fire of the Gate of Life in between the Kidneys.
From this point of view, the Triple Burner’s function of
transporting and excreting fluids is inseparable from its location
489
between the Kidneys where the Fire of the Gate of Life resides. For
this reason, the Triple Burner is closely related to the Original Qi.
Chapter 66
 
of the “Classic of Difficulties” states:
The Motive Force (Dong Qi) that resides between the Kidneys
below the umbilicus is the source of life (ming) and the root of
the twelve channels and that is why it is called Original [Qi].
The Triple Burner is the emissary of the Original Qi.
 
4
 
It
penetrates through the three Burners and spreads to the five Yin
and the six Yang organs. Original Qi is the honorary name for
the Triple Burner and that is why the places where [the Qi of
the Triple Burner] stops in turn are called Origin [Source]
points. Therefore diseases of the five Yin and the six Yang
organs can be reflected on the Origin [Source] points.
 
5
As the Original Qi, which resides between the Kidneys, is the
basis for the Triple Burner and transforms fluids that affect the
skin, this is another way in which the Kidneys influence the skin
(
Fig. 21.3
 
).
FIG. 21.3
 
Relationship between Kidneys, Triple Burner and skin
Chapter 47
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” illustrates the connection
between the skin and the Kidneys and Triple Burner: 
“The Kidneys
490
are connected with the Triple Burner and the Bladder which
influence the pores and body hair”
 
.
 
6
 
Another passage from
Chapter 64
 
of the “Simple Questions” also illustrates the
relationship between the Kidneys and the skin: “
When there is a
pathogenic factor in the Kidneys, the skin is affected and there is a rash
.”
 
7
Therefore, if the Kidneys are healthy, the skin is moistened and
has lustre. If the Kidneys are deficient (in particular Kidney-Yin),
the fluids are deficient and the skin loses moisture and becomes
dry and lustreless. The thickening and hardening of the skin seen
in scleroderma may be caused by a deficiency of Kidney-Yin in
chronic cases. If Kidney-Yang is deficient, the fluids accumulate in
the space between the skin and muscles and cause oedema.
The Skin And The Liver
The Liver influences the skin through Liver-Blood. Like Kidney-
Yin, Liver-Blood moistens and nourishes the skin and a deficiency
of Liver-Blood is a common cause of dry skin, especially in women
(of course, Liver-Yin deficiency may also bring this about). Liver-
Fire, on the other hand, has a heating effect on the skin and is the
underlying pattern in many skin diseases.
The Skin And The Heart
The Heart influences the skin in a similar way to the Liver: Heart-
Blood moistens and nourishes the skin just as Liver-Blood does.
The influence of Heart-Blood in skin diseases, however, is seen
especially on the face.
Box 21.2
 
summarizes the influences of the Internal Organs on
the skin.
 
BOX 21.2
 
   
 
INFLUENCES OF THE
INTERNAL ORGANS ON THE SKIN
• 
 
Lungs: pores, body hair and sweat
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen: adipose tissue below the skin,
vessels below the skin, moisture of the skin
• 
 
Kidneys: moisture, Defensive Qi in the space between
skin and muscles
491
• 
 
Liver: moisture and lustre
• 
 
Heart: moisture, blood vessels under the skin
Thus, from the diagnostic point of view, the skin reflects first of
all the state of the Body Fluids, and therefore of the organs
mentioned above, and also conditions of Heat or Cold, Fullness or
Emptiness and of Yin or Yang.
The Skin And The Connecting Channels
The blood vessels (venules) visible on the surface of the skin are
always a reflection of the Connecting channels. When they become
visible, the blood vessels are an expression of the percolation of
the Blood Connecting channels towards the surface of the skin (the
Blood Connecting vessels at the deep level of the Connecting
channels).
Chapter 17
 
of the “Spiritual Axis” says: 
“
The Main channels are
in the Interior, their branches are horizontal [or crosswise] forming
the Luo channels: branching out from these are the Minute Luo.
When these are Full with stagnant Blood they should be drained
with bleeding with needle; when they are deficient, they should be
tonified with herbs”
 
.
 
8
 
Chapter 10
 
of the same book says: 
“
The
Main channels are deep and hidden between the muscles and cannot
be seen; only the Spleen channel can be seen as it emerges from
above the internal malleolus and it has no place to hide. The Luo
channels are superficial and can be seen
 
.”
 
9
 
The same chapter also
says: 
“
When the Luo channels are greenish-bluish it indicates Cold
and pain; when they are red it indicates Heat
 
.”
 
10
Macules
 
are a reflection of the Blood Connecting channels and
red macules indicate Blood-Heat, while purple ones indicate Blood
stasis. Bluish macules indicate pain and Blood stasis. 
Papules
indicate Heat in the Connecting channels. 
Vesicles
 
indicate
Dampness in the space between skin and muscles and the
Connecting channels. 
Pustules
 
indicate Toxic Heat in the
Connecting channels.
Apart from the blood vessels, the colour of the skin itself
492
reflects the condition of the Connecting channels; red indicates
Heat, green indicates pain, purple indicates Blood stasis, and
bluish indicates Blood stasis and pain.
SKIN SIGNS
Skin Colour
“Skin colour” refers to the colour of the body skin itself, as distinct
from the complexion (discussed in 
Chapter 3
 
). It does not refer to
skin rashes, which will be discussed separately. The colours
discussed are:
 
• 
 
pale
• 
 
red
• 
 
yellow
• 
 
bluish-greenish
• 
 
dark.
Of course, when observing body-skin colour one should take
into account individual variations due to race and occupation. This
has already been discussed in 
Chapter 3
 
dealing with observation
of the complexion. For example, a body skin that might be
described as “pale” in a Mediterranean person would be normal in
a Swedish person. Generally speaking, the colours described below
apply to any racial group: for example, the body skin of an African-
American or an Indian may be pale in colour, like a Caucasian’s,
although it will obviously look different.
The pathological colours described below may not necessarily
appear all over the body, but may manifest in various localized
places; the location of the pathological colour gives an indication
of the organ and channel involved. If a large area is affected, this
generally indicates that an organ is involved, whereas if the
pathological colour appears along a definite line it indicates that
the channel is involved. For example, if the epigastrium is
generally very pale, it may indicate a condition of Yang deficiency
of the Stomach, whereas if there is a redness appearing along the
493
Lung channel it may indicate Heat in that particular channel rather
than in the organ (although it would not exclude Heat in the organ
as well).
Pale body skin
A pale body skin may indicate Qi, Yang or Blood deficiency. In Qi
deficiency the body skin is slightly pale, in Yang deficiency it is
pale and bright, while in Blood deficiency it is pale and dull.
Red body skin
A red body skin generally indicates Heat. If the redness appears
suddenly and the colour is bright red, this indicates Full Heat; if
the redness appears gradually and the colour is red but dull and
dry, it indicates Empty Heat; if the colour is dark red and dull, it
indicates Blood stasis. A “floating” red colour (i.e. the red looks
like “rouge” applied to the surface of the skin) indicates Empty-
Heat.
A redness of the body skin in acute cases is common in
invasions of Wind-Heat; in such cases, besides the face, the neck
and arms may also become red.
Yellow body skin
A dull-yellow body skin indicates Dampness or chronic Qi and
Blood deficiency, while a bright-yellow skin indicates Damp-Heat.
With an acute onset, this indicates the possibility of jaundice. One
can distinguish five different yellow colours:
 
• 
 
dampness yellow
• 
 
dull yellow
• 
 
stagnant-Blood yellow
• 
 
jaundice yellow
• 
 
“thick” yellow.
These colours are described in 
Table 21.1
 
.
494
Table 21.1
Differentiation of five types of yellow
Bluish-greenish body skin
As usual, “bluish-greenish” is a translation of the Chinese word
“
qing
 
”. A bluish colour of the body skin generally indicates Cold;
such a colour is common on the Bladder channel in the buttocks
and legs and is frequently seen in patients suffering from sciatica.
A greenish colour of the body skin generally indicates Qi or
Blood stagnation; such a colour is common on the face and
abdomen.
In newborn babies, a greenish colour on the buttocks and back
indicates a poor constitution and Accumulation Disorder.
Dark body skin
A dark body skin generally indicates severe Kidney deficiency. In
Chinese medicine this particular colour was called “dark jaundice”
(
Hei Dan
 
) although it has nothing to do with jaundice. The Kidney
deficiency manifesting with this colour was attributed to excessive
sexual activity in old times; for this reason, this colour was also
called “women-fatigue jaundice” (
Nu Lao Dan
 
). In reality, this
Kidney deficiency may be caused by other factors (such as
overwork) besides excessive sexual activity.
A dark skin colour may also be caused by Blood stasis, in which
case it will be dark without lustre and it will be associated with a
purple colour of the lips and nails.
Box 21.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying different skin
colours.
495
 
BOX 21.3
 
   
 
SKIN COLOURS
• 
 
Pale: Qi, Yang or Blood deficiency
• 
 
Red: Heat, Empty-Heat or Wind-Heat
• 
 
Yellow: Qi and Blood deficiency, Dampness, Damp-
Heat, jaundice
• 
 
Bluish: Cold
• 
 
Greenish: Qi or Blood stagnation
• 
 
Dark: Kidney deficiency
Skin Texture
Apart from the colour, other aspects of the skin should be
considered:
 
• 
 
lustre
• 
 
moisture
• 
 
texture
• 
 
growths on the skin.
Lustre
Lustre in relation to the skin has already been described in the
chapter on Complexion (
Chapter 3
 
). A body skin with lustre
indicates a good state of Body Fluids and of the Lungs, Stomach
and Liver.
Moisture
The moisture of the skin reflects the nourishment of the skin by
Body Fluids and Blood; a normal moist state of the skin therefore
reflects a healthy state of Body Fluids and Blood, and of the Liver
and Kidneys primarily.
Texture
The skin should be firm but elastic and its surface should be
496
smooth; this reflects a healthy state of the Lungs and Spleen. A
rough texture may be due to Lung-Qi deficiency, while if the skin
feels hardened it may indicate Dampness or Blood stasis.
Growths
Growths may take the form of vesicles, papules, pustules, moles,
warts, etc. and they will be described below.
Skin Of The Forearm (Inner Aspect)
Besides palpation, the skin of the inner aspect of the forearm
should be observed for slackness, tightness, moistness, dryness,
protrusion and shrinking.
If the inner aspect of the forearm looks slack and loose, this
indicates Heat; if it is tight, it indicates Cold. If the forearm is
moist, this indicates Wind invasion; if it is dry it indicates Blood or
Yin deficiency. If the forearm skin seems to be protruding and
sticking out it indicates a Full condition; if it looks shrinking and
withered, it indicates an Empty condition.
Palpation of the forearm is discussed in 
Chapter 51
 
.
The Space Between Skin And Muscles (
Cou
Li
 
)
The space between the skin and muscles, called 
Cou Li
 
, is where
the Defensive Qi flows and where sweat comes from.
 
11
 
The state of
the space can be deduced by observing the state of the pores,
sweat and skin texture. One should differentiate between a state of
openness or closure and one of looseness or tightness.
The state of openness or closure of the space between the skin
and the muscles can be judged by the sweating: the presence of
sweating indicates that the space between the skin and muscles is
open (either through Heat or Yang deficiency); its absence
indicates that the space is closed.
A state of excessive openness of the space between skin and
muscles facilitates the invasion of external pathogenic factors,
while a state of excessive closure renders the person prone to fever
and generally Heat.
497
If the skin is tight and thick, it indicates that the space between
skin and muscles is tight, which is caused by a Full condition of
the Triple Burner and Bladder; if the skin is loose and thin, it
indicates that the space between the skin and muscles is loose,
which is caused by an Empty condition of the Triple Burner and
Bladder.
Body Hair
The body hair indicates the state of the Lungs. One should
examine its moistness, lustre and integrity.
If the body hair is lustrous, this indicates good Lung-Qi; if it is
not, it indicates weak Lung-Qi. If the body hair is strong and long,
this indicates good Qi and Blood; if it is short and weak, it
indicates deficiency of Qi and Blood. If the body hair is brittle and
breaks easily, this indicates weak Lung-Qi.
If the body hair stands on end, this indicates an invasion of
Wind-Cold. If the body hair falls off, it indicates Lung-Heat or
Lung-Qi deficiency.
Macules, Papules, Vesicles And Pustules
Macules
A macule, called 
ban
 
in Chinese, is a localized, flat area of colour
change without elevation or infiltration of the skin: when a finger
is passed over it, the macule does not stick out. A macule can be
hypopigmented, as in vitiligo, pigmented, as in a freckle, or
erythematous (red), as in a capillary haemangioma (the swollen
and superficial capillaries seen frequently on the legs of the
elderly).
Yang macules
 
occur in diseases of external origin, have a sudden
onset and appear first when the Heat reaches the Nutritive-Qi or
Blood level. They generally appear on the chest first and are sparse
and red in colour; then they gradually extend to the four limbs,
becoming more dense and darker in colour as the patient grows
feverish. A good prognosis is indicated by lightening of their
colour, lessening of their concentration and receding from the
limbs; a poor prognosis is indicated by darkening of their colour,
498
increase in their density and spreading along the limbs.
Yin macules
 
start gradually and are not associated with an
external origin or a febrile disease: they are generally due either to
chronic Blood-Heat or to Qi deficiency.
One should differentiate the shape, density and colour of the
macules. The shape of a macule can be loose or tight: a loose
macule looks like a wine stain and indicates a good prognosis; a
“tight” macule looks like the tip of a knitting needle and indicates
that Toxic Heat and Blood-Heat are severe and that the prognosis is
poor.
The density of the macules is also important: the more dense
they are, the more intense is the Blood-Heat.
As for the colour, one should differentiate the following colours
of macules:
 
• 
 
red
• 
 
purple
• 
 
black
• 
 
white.
Red macules
Red macules always indicate Heat. In the course of a febrile
disease, they appear at the Nutritive-Qi or Blood level and they
should always be considered as a dangerous sign. Meningitis is an
example of an acute febrile disease that manifests with macules
when it reaches the Nutritive-Qi or Blood level. Macules can be
differentiated from papules (see below) by pressing them: if they
disappear on pressure they are papules, if not, they are macules. A
good method is to use a glass: if the spot disappears when the side
of a glass is pressed against it, it is a papule; if not, it is a macule.
In the course of acute, febrile diseases, especially in children, it is
vital to distinguish papules from macules because the latter
indicate the progression of a disease to the Blood level, which is
always a dangerous sign. For example, if a child falls ill with
meningitis the appearance of macules is a dangerous sign which
should always be taken seriously.
The darker the macules, the more intense is the Blood-Heat.
499
 
Remember
 
: in the course of an acute, febrile disease,
especially in children, it is vital to distinguish between
papules and macules. Papules disappear when the side
of a glass is pressed against them, macules do not.
Purple macules
Purple macules indicate Blood-Heat with Blood stasis. (See 
Plates
21.1
 
and 
21.2 on p. P9
 
.)
Black macules
Black macules indicate very severe Blood-Heat and a dangerous
condition. If they are black but bright and clear, the condition,
although severe, can be treated. If they are black, dark and murky,
this indicates that there is severe Blood-Heat and Toxic Heat and
the condition is dangerous and the prognosis poor. If they are
black, dull, unclear and edged with red it indicates that, although
the illness is severe, the patient can be treated.
White macules
White macules may indicate Qi and Blood stagnation, Blood
deficiency or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Papules
A papule, in Chinese called 
Qiu Zhen
 
, is a small, solid and usually
well-demarcated elevation of the skin, generally defined as less
than 5 mm in diameter. Papules may be flat-topped as in lichen
planus or dome-shaped as in acne.
Red papules always indicate Heat. The Heat may be in any organ
but the most frequent locations are the Lungs and Stomach. In
terms of levels, the Heat manifested by papules may be at any
level, that is, external Wind-Heat, Heat at the Qi level or Heat at
the Blood level. Papules frequently reflect Heat combined with
Dampness or Phlegm.
Dark-red or purple papules indicate Heat with Blood stasis.
Chronic papular eruptions may be due to Spleen-Qi deficiency
500
with Dampness. Papules with a crust indicate Blood or Yin
deficiency.
A wheal, called 
Feng Tuan
 
in Chinese, is a type of papule
(although it may also be a plaque) characterized by a transitory,
compressible elevation of skin with dermal oedema, red or white
in colour. Urticaria is a typical example of skin eruptions with
wheals. Pale wheals are caused by invasion of Wind-Cold or Yang
deficiency; red wheals are caused by Heat or Empty-Heat; dark,
purple wheals indicate Blood stasis. (See 
Plate 21.3 on p. P9
 
).
A plaque, in Chinese called 
Ban
 
, is a type of papule: it is a
palpable, plateau-like elevation of skin, usu-ally more than 2 cm in
diameter. Certain psoriasis lesions are typical examples of plaques.
The clinical 
significance of plaques is the same as that of papules,
that is, red plaques signify Heat while dark ones indicate Heat with
Blood stasis. The fact that the Chinese name for plaques is the
same as that for macule (
Ban
 
) should not induce us to infer that
plaques indicate Blood-Heat (as do macules). (See 
Plate 21.4 on p.
P9
 
.)
Vesicles
A vesicle, in Chinese called 
Shui Pao
 
, is a small blister (usually less
than 5 mm in diameter) consisting of clear fluid accumulated
within or below the epidermis. A vesicle larger than 5 mm is called
a 
bulla
 
. (See 
Plate 21.5 on p. P10
 
.)
Vesicles are a classic sign of Dampness, large ones usually
indicating Damp-Heat and small ones indicating Dampness with
underlying Spleen deficiency.
Table 21.2
 
differentiates between macules, papules and vesicles.
Table 21.2
Differentiation between macules, papules and vesicles
501
Pustules
A pustule, in Chinese called 
Nong Pao
 
, is a visible collection of free
pus in a blister. Pustules may indicate infection (as in a furuncle or
infected eczema) but not always, as the pustules seen in psoriasis,
for example, are not infected.
Pustules usually indicate Toxic Heat or Damp-Heat mixed with
Toxic Heat. The Heat is often related to the Lungs, Stomach or
Spleen. (See 
Plate 21.6 on p. P10
 
.)
Box 21.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying these skin
growths.
 
BOX 21.4
 
   
 
MACULES, PAPULES,
VESICLES, PUSTULES
Macules
Red: Heat at Nutritive-Qi or Blood level
Purple: Blood-Heat with Blood stasis
Black: severe Blood-Heat, dangerous
White: Blood stasis, Blood deficiency, Kidney-Yin
deficiency
Papules
• 
 
Red: Heat
• 
 
Dark red or purple: Heat with Blood stasis.
• 
 
Chronic, on-off: Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
• 
 
Papules with crust: Blood or Yin deficiency
• 
 
Wheal: invasion of Wind-Cold if pale; Heat or Empty-
Heat if red; Blood stasis if dark or purple
• 
 
Plaque: Blood-Heat if red; Blood stasis if dark
Vesicles
• 
 
Dampness
Pustules
• 
 
Toxic Heat
• 
 
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat
502
Dry Skin
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 77
The most common cause of dry skin is Liver-Blood deficiency;
this is especially common in women. Liver-Yin and Kidney-Yin
deficiency are a common cause of dry skin in the elderly. In some
cases, a dry skin may be due to Stomach-Yin deficiency.
A particular type of dry skin is that due to chronic Blood stasis;
due to the interaction and mutual exchange between Blood and
Body Fluids, stagnant Blood may impair the circulation of Body
Fluids and this may cause the skin to become dry. Dry skin from
Blood stasis occurs only in chronic cases when the Blood stasis is
severe and it is more common in the elderly. It is fairly easy to
distinguish between dry skin due to Blood stasis and that due to
Yin or Blood deficiency because in the former the skin is also dark
and lacks lustre and the nails are often dark or purple and dry and
withered. Apart from that, there will be some general symptoms
and signs of Blood stasis.
Box 21.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dry skin.
 
BOX 21.5
 
   
 
DRY SKIN
• 
 
Dark: Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Stomach-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Chronic Blood stasis
Greasy Skin
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Greasy skin is always due either to Dampness or Phlegm. The
greasy skin from Phlegm is usually accompanied also by a certain
“puffiness” of the skin.
Swelling Of The Skin
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms
and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 64
503
Swelling of the skin may be due to accumulation of fluids under
the skin as in oedema, stagnation of Qi or Dampness. Excluding
the swelling due to Dampness, there are two main types of
oedema: “Water oedema” (
Shui Zhong
 
) and “Qi Oedema” (
Qi
Zhong
 
).
Water oedema
 
is due to accumulation of fluids in the space
between the skin and muscles usually from a dysfunction of the
Lungs (not diffusing fluids), Spleen (not transforming fluids) and
Kidneys (not transforming and excreting fluids). With Water
oedema, there is pitting. Usually a distinction is made between
Yang Water oedema, which has an acute onset, is of external origin
and affects the top part of the body (usually with involvement of
the Lungs), and Yin Water oedema, which has a slow onset, is of
internal origin and affects the middle and lower parts of the body
(usually with involvement of the Spleen and Kidneys).
Qi oedema
 
is due to Qi stagnation in the space between the skin
and muscles and there is no pitting on pressure. It may also be
due to Dampness or Phlegm obstructing the space between the
skin and muscles and impairing the Spleen’s transformation and
transportation of fluids, in which case there may be pitting.
There is a third, less common, type of skin swelling due to Blood
stasis; this is called 
Blood oedema
 
. In this case, the skin is
swollen, dark, purple and without lustre. This swelling is often
associated with joint pain.
Box 21.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying skin oedema.
 
BOX 21.6
 
   
 
OEDEMA
• 
 
Water oedema: Lung, Spleen and Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Qi oedema: Qi stagnation, Dampness or Phlegm
• 
 
Blood oedema: Blood stasis
Scales
A scale, called 
Lin Xiao
 
in Chinese, is an accumulation of
thickened, horny-layer keratin in the form of readily detached
fragments. Scales usually indicate an inflammatory change and
thickening of the epidermis. They may be fine, as in pityriasis,
504
white and silvery, as in psoriasis, or large and resembling fish
scales, as in ichthyosis. (See 
Plate 21.7 on p. P10
 
.)
In chronic skin diseases, dry scales are usually due to deficient
and dry Blood giving rise to Wind; it should be noted here that
“Wind” in the context of skin diseases is different from external
Wind or Internal Wind. In acute or subacute skin diseases, scales
may be due to Heat and will therefore also appear in Damp-Heat.
One should not assume that scales cannot appear when there is
Dampness: eczema is a typical example of this situation. Oily
scales are due to accumulation of Damp-Heat.
Erosion Of The Skin
Skin erosion is a superficial break in the epidermis, not extending
into the dermis, which heals without scarring. Erosion is often
seen after the appearance of vesicles or pustules.
Red erosion with oozing of a yellow fluid indicates Damp-Heat.
Erosion with exudate of thick yellow fluid indicates Damp-Heat
with Toxic Heat. Erosion with oozing of thin-watery fluids indicates
Dampness with underlying Spleen deficiency.
Box 21.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying scales and erosion.
 
BOX 21.7
 
   
 
SCALES AND EROSION
Scales
• 
 
Dry: deficiency and Dryness of Blood with Wind
• 
 
Red: Heat or Damp-Heat
• 
 
Oily: Damp-Heat
Erosion of skin
• 
 
Erosion with oozing of yellow fluid: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Erosion with exudate of thick yellow fluid: Damp-
Heat with Toxic Heat
• 
 
Erosion with oozing of thin watery fluid: Dampness
with Spleen-Qi deficiency
Rashes
505
A rash, called 
Zhen
 
in Chinese, is a redness of the skin caused by
vasodilatation. The Western medical name is erythema. The main
rashes to be differentiated are measles, German measles,
chickenpox and urticaria.
Measles (morbillus), called “Hemp Rash” (
Ma Zhen
 
) in Chinese,
once a common childhood infection, is now rare in developed
countries but in developing countries is still common and still a
major cause of child mortality.
German measles (rubella), called “Wind Rash” (
Feng Zhen
 
) in
Chinese, is a common childhood infection with a benign course.
Chickenpox (varicella), called “Water Pox” (
Shui Dou
 
) in
Chinese, is a common childhood infection characterized by
Dampness.
The differentiation of the rash in these three diseases is made in
Table 21.3
 
.
Table 21.3
Differentiation of measles, German measles and chickenpox
Fissures
A fissure (or crack) is a linear split in the epidermis, often just
extending into the dermis. From the Chinese point of view, fissures
are due to a disharmony of Qi and Blood, Blood deficiency or
Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Skin Ulcers
Western pathology and diagnosis
506
An ulcer is a circumscribed area of skin loss extending through the
epidermis into the dermis. Ulcers are usually the result of
impairment of the vascular nutrient supply to the skin, often
caused by peripheral arterial disease. Ulcer formation is preceded
by itching, pain, erythema, oedema, breakage of the skin and
oozing. When the ulcer is formed, there is loss of epidermis; as the
ulcer progresses, the opening becomes wider and deeper. (See
Plates 21.8
 
and 
21.9 on pp. P10 and P11
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
In Chinese medicine two types of ulcers are differentiated: 
Yang
ulcers have edges that protrude clearly, are clearly defined and are
shaped like a basin; 
Yin
 
ulcers do not have protruding edges, they
are shallower, their edges are not clearly defined and there is more
oozing. Yang ulcers are predominantly caused by a Full condition
and have a better prognosis than Yin ulcers, which are
characterized by a mixture of Deficiency and Excess.
The main patterns giving rise to ulcers are accumulation of
Damp-Heat, Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness, Qi stagnation
and Blood stasis and Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Ulcers caused by Damp-Heat are characterized by hardened and
rounded edges and oozing of a thick yellow fluid.
Ulcers caused by Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness are
characterized by a greyish-white tissue inside the ulcer and oozing
of a clear fluid.
Ulcers caused by Qi stagnation and Blood stasis are
characterized by surrounding skin swelling with a purple colour,
pain and varicosities.
Ulcers caused by Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency are
characterized by deep-red surrounding skin and absence of pain.
Box 21.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying ulcers.
 
BOX 21.8
 
   
 
SKIN ULCERS
• 
 
Hardened with round edges and oozing of thick
yellow fluids: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Greyish-white tissue and oozing of clear fluid: Spleen-
Qi deficiency with Dampness
• 
 
Swelling of surrounding skin, purple colour, pain and
507
varicosities: Qi stagnation or Blood stasis
• 
 
Deep-red surrounding skin, no pain: Liver- and
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dermographism
Dermographism (literally meaning “writing on the skin”) indicates
the red wheals that may appear when the skin is stroked with a
hard object such as the end of a pencil or a nail. From the Western
point of view, this is due to the exaggerated release of histamine
from the mast cells in the skin; this occurs in atopic individuals
and is due to the presence of abnormal levels of immunoglobulin
E (IgE) around the mast cells of the skin. (See 
Plate 21.10 on p. P11
.)
From a Chinese perspective, dermographism indicates the
presence of Wind in the skin, often Wind-Heat. If the patient
suffers from atopic eczema, it indicates that Wind-Heat
predominates; if the patient suffers from allergic asthma, it
indicates that there is Wind and Heat in the Lungs.
SKIN DISEASES
Eczema
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 77
 
, 
89
Western pathology and diagnosis
Eczema is the commonest skin disease seen in practice. In the UK,
eczema and acne make up the highest proportion of skin diseases
while, in general practice, eczema accounts for 30% of patients
presenting with a skin problem. A complete discussion of the
aetiology and pathology of eczema (both from a Western and a
Chinese point of view) is beyond the scope of this book and I will
concentrate on the diagnostic aspects, that is, how to recognize
eczema and differentiate between it and other skin diseases. This
is not a simple task since there are very many different types of
508
eczema presenting in many different ways. In Western medicine,
the term “dermatitis” is generally now preferred to that of
“eczema”.
The most commonly seen eczema in practice is atopic eczema in
children and babies. In babies, there is usually an exudative,
vesicular rash on the face and hands. After 18 months, the pattern
changes to the familiar involvement of the elbow and knee creases,
neck, wrists and ankles. The face often shows erythema and
infraorbital folds. Lichenification (from scratching), excoriation
and dry skin are common and palmar markings are increased.
Scratching and rubbing cause most of the clinical signs.
In adults, the commonest manifestation is hand dermatitis,
exacerbated by irritants and with a past history of atopic eczema. A
small number of adults have a chronic, severe form of generalized
and lichenified atopic eczema. Exacerbations are often elicited by
stress.
It should be remembered that many acute, sudden
exacerbations are due to skin infection from 
Staphylococcus aureus
rather than the eczema itself: skin infections in eczema are
common as the skin is excoriated and therefore prone to invasion
of bacteria. An acute infection is characterized by sudden
aggravation of the eczema, papular or pustular rash and
pronounced erythema. (See 
Plates 21.11–21.20 on pp. P11-P13
 
Plate
21.12
 
Plate 21.13
 
Plate 21.14
 
Plate 21.15
 
Plate 21.16
 
Plate 21.17
 
Plate
21.18
 
Plate 21.19
 
Plate 21.20
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
The modern Chinese name for eczema is “Damp Rash” (
Shi Zhen
 
)
clearly indicating the idea that Dampness is always present in
eczema.
 
Remember
 
: in eczema, there is 
always
 
Dampness, even
if the skin is not oozing.
Acute eczema is characterized by intense itching, vesicles,
erythema (redness), swelling of the skin. Chronic eczema is
characterized by itching, erythema, swelling of the skin, crusting,
509
scaling, lichenification (thickening of the skin with increased skin
markings), excoriation, and erosion. Chronic eczema may be
weeping or dry: weeping eczema indicates the predominance of
Dampness, whereas dry eczema indicates the predominance of
Heat. However, it should be remembered that in eczema there is
always some Dampness as there are always fluid-filled vesicles
under the epidermis (which causes the swelling of the skin); when
these vesicles come to the surface, the eczema weeps.
Furthermore, in atopic dermatitis the superficial stratum corneum
of the skin is damaged so that the 
skin cannot hold moisture
properly; this means that the skin becomes dry as a consequence
rather than as a cause of the eczema.
The main pattern seen in atopic eczema is Damp-Heat with one
or the other factor predominant (see above). In chronic eczema in
adults, there is also Damp-Heat, but the the condition is
characterized by Empty conditions as well and primarily a Spleen
deficiency and a Blood deficiency and Dryness, with Blood failing
to nourish the skin. Itching is caused by the Dampness or, in
chronic cases, by the Wind generated by the Blood deficiency.
Wind also plays a role in chronic eczema in combination with
Damp-Heat. Wind will manifest with the location of the rash on
the upper part of the body and with intense itching. If the eczema
is concentrated in the lower part of the body, this indicates the
prevalance of Dampness. In chronic eczema in adults, Wind is also
generated by the deficiency and Dryness of the Blood.
If the skin oozes a yellow fluid, it indicates the prevalence of
Damp-Heat, while if it oozes a clear fluid, it indicates Dampness
against a background of Spleen deficiency. If the skin oozes after
scratching it also indicates Dampness, while if it bleeds after
scratching, it indicates Blood-Heat. If the skin oozes a thick, sticky
yellow fluid, it may indicate the possibility of a skin infection from
S. aureus
 
; this is a common complication of eczema.
Case history 21.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying dry eczema.
 
Case History 21.1
A 29-year-old woman had been suffering from atopic
eczema since she was a few months old. The
manifestations were typical of atopic eczema
manifesting with a dry red rash, scaliness, thickening of
510
the skin and intense itching. The location of the eczema
was confined to the top part of the body. The eczema
became worse during a pregnancy and after childbirth.
Her eczema was also aggravated with cyclical regularity
every 7 years. Her tongue was slightly Red, with red
points on the front part, a Stomach crack and not
enough tongue coating. Her pulse was very Weak on the
right Front position and Overflowing on the left at the
middle level.
She was very thin and restless, tapping her fingers on
the table as she talked.
Diagnosis
 
: The immediate presenting pattern of the
eczema is Empty-Heat in the Blood with Wind-Heat in
the skin. The Empty-Heat in the Blood is manifested by
the red, dry rash and the tongue being Red without
enough coating; the Wind-Heat is manifested by the
intense itching and the location of the eczema on the
top part of the body. There is also a Yin deficiency of the
Lungs and Stomach manifested by the Stomach crack
and Weak pulse on the right Front position. The Yin
deficiency is also manifested by the thin body and by
her restless behaviour, tapping her fingers on the table
as she talks.
Underlying this, there is also a deficiency of the
Defensive-Qi systems of the Lungs and Kidneys and
especially of the Lungs; this is manifested by the Weak
pulse on the right Front position and by the aggravation
of the eczema during pregnancy and after childbirth.
An interesting feature of this case is the cyclical
aggravation of the eczema every 7 years, which is in
perfect accordance with the Chinese view on 7-year
cycles in a woman’s life as described in the first chapter
of the “Simple Questions”.
Box 21.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying eczema.
 
511
BOX 21.9
 
   
 
ECZEMA
• 
 
Weeping eczema: Damp-Heat with predominance of
Dampness
• 
 
Dry eczema: Damp-Heat with predominance of Heat
• 
 
Chronic eczema in adults: Damp-Heat with Spleen-Qi
deficiency and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Itchy eczema: Dampness or Wind generated by Blood
deficiency
• 
 
Eczema in upper part of body: Damp-Heat with Wind
• 
 
Eczema in lower part of the body: Damp-Heat with
prevalence of Dampness
• 
 
Skin oozing a clear fluid: Dampness with Spleen
deficiency
• 
 
Oozing a yellow fluid: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Oozing a thick, sticky yellow fluid: possibly infection
of skin
• 
 
Oozing a fluid after scratching: Dampness
• 
 
Bleeding after scratching: Blood-Heat
Acne
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 5
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 55
 
and
 
77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Acne is a chronic inflammation of the pilosebaceous units,
producing comedones, then papules, pustules or cysts, and
eventually possible scars. Acne has an equal sex incidence but
tends to affect women earlier than men, although the peak age for
clinical acne is 18 years in both sexes.
As for the clinical presentation, comedones are either open
(blackheads, which are dilated pores with black plugs of melanin-
containing keratin) or closed (whiteheads, which are small, cream-
coloured, dome-shaped papules). They appear at about the age of
12 years and evolve into inflammatory papules, pustules or cysts.
The sites of predilection (face, shoulders, back and upper chest)
512
have many sebaceous glands. The severity of acne depends on its
extent and the type of lesion, with cysts being the most
destructive. Scars 
may follow healing especially of cysts. (See
Plates 21.21–21.24 on pp. P13 and P14
 
Plate 21.22
 
Plate 21.23
 
Plate
21.24
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese perspective, the main causes of acne are:
 
• 
 
Lung-Heat
 
: this is characterized by papular
whiteheads and blackheads usually on the forehead,
around the nose and on the upper back and chest.
• 
 
Stomach-Heat
 
: this is characterized by papular
whiteheads and blackheads usually around the mouth
and on the chest and upper back.
• 
 
Blood-Heat
 
: this is characterized by red papules
usually around the nose, mouth and eyebrows. This type
of acne is often worse before and during menstruation.
• 
 
Toxic Heat
 
: this is characterized by pustules which
may be painful. It may also manifest with inflamed
cysts. The most frequently affected sites are the upper
back and chest.
• 
 
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat and Blood stasis
 
: this is
characterized by deep, painful, inflamed nodules and
pus-filled cysts. This type usually leaves pitting and
scarring.
• 
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
 
: this is often an
underlying condition combined with Dampness and
characterized by long-lasting papules which take a long
time to resolve.
Box 21.10
 
summarizes the patterns underlying acne.
 
BOX 21.10
 
   
 
ACNE
• 
 
Whiteheads and blackheads on the forehead, nose,
upper back and chest: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Whiteheads and blackheads around the mouth, on
513
the chest and upper back: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Red papules around the nose, mouth and eyebrows,
worse before/during menstruation: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Painful pustules, inflamed cysts on upper back and
chest: Toxic Heat
• 
 
Deep, painful, inflamed nodules, pus-filled cysts,
pitting and scarring: Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat and
Blood stasis
• 
 
Long-lasting papules which take a long time to
resolve: Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency often combined
with Dampness
Psoriasis
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Psoriasis is a chronic, non-infectious, inflammatory dermatosis
characterized by well-demarcated erythematous plaques topped by
silvery scales. The peak onset of psoriasis is in the second and
third decades. It is unusual in children under 8 years of age.
About 35% of patients show a family history of the disease.
There is a 25% probability that if one of a child’s parents has
psoriasis the child will be similarly affected, but this increases to
60% if both parents have psoriasis.
Psoriasis’s appearance ranges from the typical chronic plaques
involving the elbows to the acute, generalized pustular form.
There are many different types of psoriasis:
 
• 
 
Plaque
 
: this consists in well-defined, disc-shaped
plaques involving elbows, knees, scalp or hair margin.
• 
 
Guttate
 
: this is an acute symmetrical eruption of
“drop-like” lesions usually on the trunk and limbs. This
form usually affects adolescents or young adults and
may follow a streptococcal throat infection.
• 
 
Flexural
 
: this affects the flexures of the axillae, the
areas under the breasts and groin. It is usually seen in
514
the elderly.
 
• 
 
Localized
 
: localized psoriasis may be seen on palms
and soles, fingers and nails, scalp.
• 
 
Generalized pustular
 
: this is a rare type of psoriasis
characterized by pustules all over the body. Sheets of
small, sterile, yellowish pustules develop on an
erythematous background and may spread rapidly. The
onset is often acute and the patient is unwell, with fever
and malaise.
• 
 
Nails
 
: thimble pitting is the commonest change in
this type of psoriasis, followed by separation of the
distal edge of the nail from the nail bed. There is
subungual hyperkeratosis with a build-up of keratin
beneath the distal edge of the nail, mostly affecting the
toenails.
• 
 
Psoriatic arthritis
 
: this is an autoimmune disease
characterized by the simultaneous occurrence of
psoriasis and arthritis which resembles rheumatoid
arthritis.
Another diagnostic sign of psoriasis is the Auspitz’s sign - that
is, scraping of the superficial scales will typically reveal tiny
bleeding points.
As there are many types of psoriasis, other skin diseases may
easily be wrongly diagnosed as psoriasis. 
Table 21.4
 
illustrates the
differential diagnosis of the most common types of psoriasis (i.e.
for each type of psoriasis, the table lists other skin diseases which
may look like psoriasis). Although Chinese medicine treats skin
diseases primarily according to the presenting pattern and not
according to the type of skin disease, in the particular case of
psoriasis it is important to differentiate it from other diseases
because of its prognosis; psoriasis is usually more difficult to treat.
(See 
Plates 21.25–21.31 on pp. P14-P16
 
Plate 21.26
 
Plate 21.27
 
Plate
515
21.28
 
Plate 21.29
 
Plate 21.30
 
Plate 21.31
 
.)
Table 21.4
Differential diagnosis of various types of psoriasis
Type of psoriasis
Differential diagnosis
Plaque psoriasis
Psoriasiform drug eruption
Palmoplantar psoriasis
Hyperkeratotic eczema, Reiter’s disease
Scalp psoriasis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Guttate psoriasis
Pityriasis rosea
Flexural psoriasis
Candidiasis of the flexures
Nail psoriasis
Fungal infection of the nails
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
The patterns causing psoriasis are:
 
• 
 
Blood-Heat
 
: this is characterized by red macules or
papules that increase and proliferate rapidly. Red scales
pile up and are easily shed when scratched.
• 
 
Blood deficient and dry
 
: this is characterized by pale
and very dry plaques which are covered by a thin layer
of white scales. The course of the disease is slow with
new lesions appearing sporadically.
• 
 
Blood stasis
 
: this is characterized by dark-purple
plaques covered by thick scales. In chronic psoriasis
only, lichenification may appear.
• 
 
Damp-Heat
 
: this is characterized by dark-red macules
or papules covered by greasy or thick, crust-like scales.
The skin weeps. There may also be pustules. The sites
affected are usually the palms, soles and skin flexures.
• 
 
Toxic Heat
 
: this is characterized by erythematous or
pustular lesions which develop and spread rapidly, often
piling up together. There are red scales that shed easily
and there is itching, burning and pain.
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
 
: this is
characterized by pale-red macules covered by a thin
layer of greyish-white scales. A chronic condition, it is
usually seen in the elderly.
516
In addition to the above patterns, there is also nearly always
Wind in psoriasis. Wind causes intense itching and also dryness:
thus, it is important to remember that Dryness is not always a
symptom of Blood deficiency.
Box 21.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying psoriasis.
 
BOX 21.11
 
   
 
PSORIASIS
• 
 
Red macules or papules with red scales that shed
when scratched: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Pale, very dry plaques with a thin layer of white scales,
new lesions appearing sporadically: Blood deficient and
dry
• 
 
Dark-purple plaques with thick scales, lichenification
in chronic psoriasis: Blood stasis
• 
 
Dark-red macules or papules with greasy or thick,
crust-like scales, weeping skin, possibly pustules, on
palms, soles and skin flexures: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Erythematous/pustular lesions spreading rapidly, with
red scales that shed easily, itching, burning and pain:
Toxic Heat
• 
 
Chronic pale-red macules with a thin layer of greyish-
white scales (elderly): Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Urticaria
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Urticaria is a skin eruption characterized by transient, itchy wheals
due to acute, dermal oedema. The cause is an allergic reaction. The
lesions result when mast cells release histamine, which produces
vasodilatation and the characteristic wheals.
Urticaria can be acute or chronic. Acute urticaria is typically due
to an IgE-mediated type I reaction. The allergen is usually a food
(e.g. shellfish or peanuts) or a drug. In some cases urticaria may
also be due to insect stings or bites, desensitizing injections or
517
inhalants such as pollen, moulds or animal dander. Some women
develop urticaria during menstruation. Acute urticaria normally
manifests with a sudden onset of red and very itchy wheals which
rapidly spread all over the body. The lesions may be small or may
enlarge to as much as 20 cm across. Chronic urticaria is
characterized by pale-red or pink itchy wheals which typically last
less than 24 hours and disappear without a trace. Often no allergen
can be identified. Urticaria may also be caused by exposure to cold,
heat or sun. (See 
Plates 21.32
 
and 
21.33 on p. P16
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
In Chinese medicine, urticaria is called 
Feng Yin Zhen
 
, which
means “Wind hidden rash”. In both acute and chronic urticaria,
there is usually always an underlying pattern of Wind in the skin.
A very common pattern, “Wind” in the skin, manifests primarily
with intense itching, either all over the body or moving from place
to place, and in chronic cases, such as psoriasis, with Dryness of
the skin; just as wind, in nature, dries up the soil, Wind in the skin
may dry up the skin in chronic cases. Wind in the skin is neither an
external type of Wind (because it does not cause exterior
symptoms, such as aversion to cold, or fever) nor an internal type
of Wind (because it does not cause tremors or paralysis).
In acute urticaria, Wind, especially Wind-Heat, predominates. It
causes intense itching with sudden onset, and red wheals
spreading rapidly; the more intense the itching, the stronger the
Wind. In chronic urticaria, Wind may be combined with a Stomach
and Spleen deficiency and Dampness, which usually makes the
patient prone to food allergies. In this case, the wheals may exude
a clear fluid, the itching is less intense and the wheals come and go
with a chronic course. In chronic cases, Wind in the skin frequently
occurs as a result of deficiency and Dryness of Blood; in such
cases, the wheals may be pale red and the itching is less intense
than in acute urticaria. This condition is more common in women
and may be associated with menstruation or arise after childbirth.
Both acute and chronic urticaria may be accompanied by Blood-
Heat, in which case the wheals are very large and bright red and,
besides itching, the patient has an intense feeling of heat and the
skin is very hot to the touch. Finally, chronic urticaria may be
518
complicated by Blood stasis, in which case the wheals are purple
and may last a long time.
Box 21.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying urticaria.
 
BOX 21.12
 
   
 
URTICARIA
• 
 
Intense itching, sudden onset, red wheals which
spread rapidly: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Wheals exuding a clear fluid, less intense itching,
coming and going: Wind, Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency, Dampness
• 
 
Pale red wheals, less intense itching: deficiency and
Dryness of Blood
• 
 
Large, bright-red wheals, itching, feeling of heat, skin
hot to touch: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Purple wheals which last a long time: Blood stasis
Naevi
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
A naevus is a benign proliferation of one or more of the normal
constituent cells of the skin. Naevi may be present at birth or may
develop later. The most common naevi are those containing a
benign collection of melanocytic naevus cells, commonly known as
moles.
A differentiation between moles and other types of skin lesions
is given in 
Table 21.5
 
. (See 
Plate 21.34 on p. P17
 
.)
519
Table 21.5
Differentiation of naevi
Lesion
Distinguishing features
Freckle
Tan-coloured macules on sun-exposed sites
Lentigo
Usually multiple with onset in later life
Seborrhoeic wart
Stuck-on appearance, warty lesions, easily confused with moles
Haemangioma
Vascular but may show pigmentation
Dermatofibroma
On legs, firm and pigmented
Pigmented, basal cell
carcinoma
Often on face, pearly edge, increase in size, may ulcerate
Malignant melanoma
Variable colour and outline, increase in size, may be inflamed or
itchy
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
Moles which are present from birth are an inherited trait without
any clinical significance. Moles that develop later in life generally
indicate Liver-Blood Heat, Damp-Heat or Blood stasis (if they are
dark).
Box 21.13
 
summarizes the patterns causing moles.
 
BOX 21.13
 
   
 
CHINESE PATHOLOGY OF
MOLES
• 
 
Blood-Heat (Liver)
• 
 
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Blood stasis
Malignant Melanoma
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Malignant melanoma is a malignant tumour of melanocytes,
usually arising in the epidermis. It is the most lethal of the main
skin tumours and has increased in incidence over the last few
years. It is particularly common in Australia, accounting for 40% of
common dermatological disorders (compared with 7% in the UK).
There are four main variants of malignant melanoma.
520
 
• 
 
Superficial, spreading, malignant melanoma
 
: this is
characterized by macules, particularly on the legs and
more commonly in females (50% of UK cases). (See
Plates 21.35
 
and 
21.39 on p. P17 and P18
 
.)
• 
 
Nodular, malignant melanoma
 
: this is characterized
by pigmented nodules which may grow rapidly and
ulcerate (25% of UK cases). (See 
Plate 21.36 on p. P17
 
.)
 
• 
 
Lentigo, malignant melanoma
 
: this is characterized
by dark macules, especially on the face and particularly
in the elderly (15% of UK cases). (See 
Plate 21.37 on p.
P17
 
.)
• 
 
Acral, lentiginous, malignant melanoma
 
: this is
characterized by plaques particularly on palms and
soles (10% of UK cases). (See 
Plate 21.38 on p. P18
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
In Chinese medicine, malignant melanomas are usually due to
Blood-Heat and Blood stasis: the darker their colour, the more
Blood stasis there is. The differentiation is also made on the basis
of the skin lesion. Macules always indicate Blood-Heat with Blood
stasis, plaques indicate Blood-Heat with Damp-Heat and nodules
indicate Blood stasis.
Box 21.14
 
summarizes the patterns underlying malignant
melanoma.
 
BOX 21.14
 
   
 
MELANOMA
• 
 
Macules: Blood-Heat with Blood stasis
• 
 
Plaques: Blood-Heat with Damp-Heat
• 
 
Nodules: Blood stasis
521
Tinea
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
The most common fungal infection is tinea. Tinea presents with
disc-like lesions consisting of a clearly defined round erythema
expanding outwards and often clearing in the centre; there is
itching and some scaling. There are many types of tinea, including
the following:
 
• 
 
Tinea corporis
 
(of the body): this is characterized by
single or multiple plaques with scaling and erythema,
especially at the edges. The lesions enlarge slowly with
central clearing, leaving a ring pattern, hence the name
ringworm. (See 
Plates 21.40
 
and 
21.41 on p. P18
 
.) It may
also manifest with pustules or vesicles.
• 
 
Tinea manuum
 
(of the hand): this is characterized by a
unilateral, diffuse, powdery scaling of the palm. (See
Plate 21.42 on p. P18
 
.)
• 
 
Tinea capitis
 
(of the head): this is characterized by an
inflamed, pustular swelling of the scalp. (See 
Plate 21.43
on p. P19
 
.)
• 
 
Tinea pedis
 
(athlete’s foot): this is characterized by an
itchy, interdigital maceration with vesicles. (See 
Plate
21.44 on p. P19
 
.)
• 
 
Tinea cruris
 
(of the groin): this is characterized by
scaling and erythema in the groin area spreading to the
upper thigh. (See 
Plate 21.45 on p. P19
 
.)
• 
 
Tinea unguium
 
(of the nails): this is characterized by
separation of the nail from the nail bed, thickening and
brittleness of the nail, which becomes yellow, and
subungual hyperkeratosis.
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, tinea of the head may be due to
Wind-Heat, Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat, while tinea of the other
522
parts of the body is mostly due to Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat. When
due to Wind-Heat, tinea affects the head and may move from place
to place. When due to Damp-Heat, it is characterized by a red and
moist rash with vesicles usually with a fixed location but spreading
slowly. When due to Toxic Heat, it is characterized by an intensely
red rash with red papules that spreads quickly.
Box 21.15
 
summarizes the pathology of tinea.
 
BOX 21.15
 
   
 
TINEA
• 
 
Tinea of head: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Red rash with vesicles: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Intensely red rash with papules: Toxic Heat
Candida
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Candida albicans
 
is a physiological fungus which is found in the
mouth and gastrointestinal tract; when it multiplies too rapidly it
can produce opportunistic infections.
Predisposing factors include:
 
• 
 
moist skin folds
• 
 
obesity
• 
 
diabetes mellitus
• 
 
pregnancy
• 
 
poor hygiene
• 
 
humid environment
• 
 
wet work occupation
• 
 
use of broad-spectrum antibiotics
• 
 
excessive consumption of sugar
Infections by 
Candida albicans
 
may affect the following areas:
 
• 
 
Genitals
 
: this is characterized by itchiness, soreness
523
and redness of the vulva and vagina in women
(“thrush”). White plaques adhere to inflamed mucous
membranes and a white vaginal discharge may occur.
Men develop similar changes on the penis. Thrush can
be spread by sexual intercourse.
• 
 
Flexures
 
: this is characterized by a moist, glazed and
macerated appearance of the flexures under the breasts
in women, axilla, groin or between the fingers or toes.
• 
 
Oral
 
: this is characterized by white plaques adhering
to an erythematous mouth mucosa. It is often caused by
use of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
• 
 
Systemic
 
: this is characterized by red nodules on the
skin; it occurs in immunosuppressed patients such as
those suffering from AIDS or those undergoing long-
term corticosteroid therapy.
(See 
Plates 21.46
 
and 
21.47 on p. P19
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, fungal infections are usually
caused by Dampness, which may be combined 
with either Cold or
Heat but more frequently with Heat. Acute fungal infections are
usually due to Damp-Heat, whereas chronic fungal infections are
characterized by Dampness but they always occur against a
background of chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency. Candida infections of
the gastrointestinal system often manifest on the tongue with
small, peeled patches with a white ring around them and a white-
sticky coating in between.
Herpes Simplex
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Herpes is a viral infection, of which there are two types: 
herpes
simplex
 
, which is due to infection from herpesvirex hominis, and
herpes zoster
 
(shingles), which is due to infection from varicella
zoster.
524
Western pathology and diagnosis
Herpes simplex is a common, acute, vesicular eruption which is
highly contagious. After the primary infection, the latent, non-
replicating virus resides mainly within the dorsal root ganglia
from where it can reactivate, invade the skin and cause recurrent
lesions. There are two types of herpes simplex virus: type one is
usually facial and type two usually genital. Type one infection
manifests with vesicles on the lips and around the mouth; they
quickly erode and are painful. The illness may be accompanied by
fever, malaise and local lymphadenopathy. Type two infection
usually occurs after sexual contact in young adults who develop
acute vulvovaginitis, penile or perianal lesions.
Recurrent attacks are the hallmark of herpes simplex infection
and they occur at a similar site each time, usually on the lips, face
or genitals. (See 
Plates 21.48
 
and 
21.49 on p. P20
 
.) The outbreak of
vesicles is often preceded by tingling or burning, crusts form
within 48 hours and the infection fades after a week.
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, herpes simplex is nearly always
characterized by Damp-Heat because vesicles by definition
indicate Dampness. However, different types may be
distinguished according to the manifestations and location of the
lesions. Lesions occurring in the upper part of the body such as
lips and mouth are due to a combination of Damp-Heat and Wind-
Heat. Lesions which occur regularly and repeatedly around the
mouth and on the lips may be due to Damp-Heat in the Stomach
and Spleen, while genital lesions are due to Damp-Heat mostly in
the Liver channel. In the elderly, recurrent herpes simplex
infections often occur against a background of Yin deficiency and
Empty-Heat so that there is an underlying Empty-Heat, which
predisposes the person to recurrent infection and Damp-Heat in
the acute stages. If the eruptions become pustular or papular and
are very painful, they indicate the presence of Toxic Heat as well as
Damp-Heat.
Box 21.16
 
summarizes the patterns underlying herpes simplex.
 
BOX 21.16
 
   
 
HERPES SIMPLEX
525
• 
 
Lesions in upper body: Damp-Heat with Wind-Heat
• 
 
Lesions around mouth: Damp-Heat in Stomach and
Spleen
• 
 
Genital lesions: Damp-Heat in Liver channel
• 
 
Recurrent infections (elderly): Damp-Heat with Yin
deficiency and Empty-Heat
• 
 
Painful papular or pustular eruptions: Damp-Heat
with Toxic Heat
Herpes Zoster
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Herpes zoster is an acute vesicular eruption occurring in the
dermatomal distribution caused by a recrudescence of the varicella
zoster virus. It nearly always occurs in people who have had
varicella (chickenpox). Pain, tenderness and tingling in the
dermatome precedes the eruption by 3 to 5 days. Erythema and
grouped vesicles follow, scattered within the dermatomal area. The
vesicles become pustular and then form crusts, which separate in 2
to 3 weeks to leave scarring. Herpes zoster is normally unilateral
and two-thirds of patients are over 50 years of age. (See 
Plate 21.50
on p. P20
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, herpes zoster is also always due to
Damp-Heat because of its vesicular and erythematous eruption,
but a further differentiation can be made according to the
manifestations and location of the lesions. If the lesions are
located in the thoracic or hypochondrial region, they are due to
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder channels. 
Generally
speaking, in lesions occurring in the neck and ophthalmic region
(which is common in the elderly), in addition to Damp-Heat there
is also Wind-Heat. Wind-Heat is also indicated if itching is very
intense. If the lesions are pustular, they indicate the presence of
526
Toxic Heat; if they are dark and very painful, they indicate Blood
stasis, which also is common in the elderly.
Box 21.17
 
summarizes the pattern underlying herpes zoster.
 
BOX 21.17
 
   
 
HERPES ZOSTER
• 
 
Lesions in trunk: Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-
Bladder
• 
 
Lesions on neck and around eyes, itchy: Damp-Heat
with Wind-Heat
• 
 
Papules or pustules: Toxic Heat
• 
 
Dark and painful papules: Blood stasis (in addition to
Toxic Heat)
Warts
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Warts are common and benign, cutaneous tumours due to
infection of epidermal cells with human papilloma virus (HPV).
The virus infects by direct inoculation and is caught by touch,
sexual contact or in swimming pools.
Common warts
 
present as dome-shaped papules or nodules,
usually on the hands or feet. (See 
Plate 21.51 on p. P20
 
.)
Plane warts
 
are smooth, flat-topped papules often slightly
brown in colour, commonest on the face and hands. (See 
Plate
21.52 on p. P21
 
.)
Plantar warts
 
are seen in children and adolescents on the soles
of the feet.
Genital warts
 
affect the penis in males and the vulva and vagina
in women. (See 
Plate 21.53 on p. P21
 
.) The warts present as small
papules.
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, common, plane and plantar warts
are usually due to a combination of Blood deficiency and Dryness,
527
Blood-Heat and Blood stasis depending on whether the warts are
pale and dry, red or dark brown. Genital warts are usually due to
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel, which may be complicated also
with Toxic Heat if the warts are pustular and painful.
Box 21.18
 
summarizes the pathology of warts.
 
BOX 21.18
 
   
 
WARTS
• 
 
Pale and dry: Blood deficient and dry
• 
 
Red: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Dark brown: Blood stasis
• 
 
Genital: Damp-Heat in Liver channel
• 
 
Painful, pustular: Toxic Heat
Rosacea
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Western pathology and diagnosis
Rosacea is a chronic, inflammatory, facial dermatosis characterized
by erythema and pustules. The earliest symptom of rosacea is
usually flushing of the cheeks which is followed by erythema,
telangiectasia (dilated dermal blood vessel), papules and pustules.
Rosacea lacks the comedones of acne and occurs in an older age
group. (See 
Plates 21.54
 
and 
21.55 on p. P21
 
.)
Chinese pathology and diagnosis
From the Chinese point of view, rosacea may be due to the
following patterns:
 
• 
 
Heat in the Lungs and Stomach
 
: this is characterized
by a red, papular rash of the cheeks.
• 
 
Toxic Heat
 
: this is characterized by a red, pustular
rash of the cheeks with swelling of the nose.
• 
 
Blood-Heat
 
: this is characterized by a red, papular
rash of the cheeks often aggravated before or during the
menstrual cycle.
• 
 
Blood stasis
 
: this is characterized by a dark-red or
528
reddish-purple papular or pustular rash of the cheeks
and nose.
Box 21.19
 
summarizes the pathology of rosacea.
 
BOX 21.19
 
   
 
ROSACEA
• 
 
Red, papular rash on cheeks: Lung- and Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Red, pustular rash of the cheeks with swelling of
nose: Toxic Heat
• 
 
Red, papular rash on the cheeks aggravated during
the period in women: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Dark-red or reddish-purple papular or pustular rash
of the cheeks and nose: Blood stasis
NOTES
1. 
Cou Li
 
(
 
) is a difficult term to translate and one that is
interpreted differently by modern Chinese doctors. 
Cou
indicates ‘spaces’ or ‘interstices’ and it refers to all the
spaces in the body, especially the small spaces (as opposed
to large cavities such as the chest and abdomen) all over
the body, including the space between skin and muscles,
which is probably the most clinically relevant. 
Li
 
means
‘texture’, ‘grain’ (as in the grain of wood) or ‘pattern’, and
it indicates the texture of skin and the Internal Organs: it
refers to the organized way in which the skin and organs
are arranged, forming a ‘texture’ or ‘pattern’. The ‘Synopsis
of Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet’ says: ‘
Cou is the
place of the Triple Burner where the Original True [Essence]
converges and Qi and Blood concentrate; Li is the texture of the
skin and Internal Organs
 
’ (He Ren 1981 A New Explanation
of the Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet
Jin Gui Yao Lue Xin Jie
 
 
), Zhejiang Science
Publishing House, Beijingp. 2). I translate 
Cou Li
 
as ‘space
529
between skin and muscles’. Although this is not strictly
accurate, because there are other spaces and because it
ignores the 
Li
 
part of it, it is the most clinically relevant. In
the context of skin, therefore, 
Cou Li
 
is the space between
skin and muscles
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:70 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:129 para 139. First
published c. 100
BC
4. 
Clavey gives a different interpretation of the words 
bie shi
 
(
 
), which are usually translated as ‘emissary’ or ‘special
emissary’. According to him, the words should be
translated as ‘makes separate’. In other words, if this
interpretation is correct, the Triple Burner separates the
undifferentiated Original Qi and directs it into different
channels and organs to perform its various functions. I
personally feel that this interpretation is probably more
correct. (Clavey, S. 1995 Fluid Physiology and Pathology in
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh, p. 21. )
5. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:144 First published c. 
AD
 
100
6. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 92
7. 
Simple Questions, p. 353.
8. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 50
9. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 37
10. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 37
11. 
The term 
Cou Li
 
actually indicates more complex structures
of the body and it includes all ‘spaces’ between organs and
between channels: functionally, the 
Cou Li
 
is connected to
the Triple Burner. In this context, I will again translate it as
‘space between skin and muscles’ but the reader should
bear in mind that this is only one of the 
Cou Li
 
‘spaces’.
530
Furthermore, while 
cou
 
means ‘spaces’ or ‘interstices’, 
li
means ‘pattern’ or ‘texture’ and it refers to the striae of the
Internal Organs. I therefore translate 
Cou Li
 
as ‘space
between skin and muscles’ in the appropriate context, even
though this is only one of the meanings of 
Cou Li
 
. (See
also Note 1 above. )
531
CHAPTER 22
 
OBSERVATION
IN CHILDREN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
COMPLEXION
Red
Yellow
Pale
Bluish-greenish
ORIFICES
Eyes
Ears
Nose
Mouth
Urethra and anus
BODY MOVEMENT
SPINAL MUSCLES
INDEX FINGER
532
Veins on the index finger
Creases on the index finger
ROOT OF THE NOSE
INTRODUCTION
Observation in children follows broadly the same rules as that of
adults. There are, however, some items of observation which apply
only to children. These are in particular:
 
• 
 
complexion
• 
 
orifices
• 
 
body movement
• 
 
spinal muscles
• 
 
index finger veins and creases
• 
 
root of the nose.
COMPLEXION
The characteristics of the normal complexion in children are the
same as in adults, i.e. the complexion should be rosy and have
proper depth, lustre and moisture.
Red
Children are prone to Heat conditions and a red complexion is
fairly common. It always indicates Heat and may pertain to the
Lungs, Stomach, Heart or Liver. In Lung-Heat the cheeks, in
particular the right cheek, are red. Stomach-Heat is common in
children and this may cause a redness on both cheeks, especially
in the lower part.
Yellow
A yellow complexion always indicates a Stomach and Spleen
533
disharmony, which may be a Stomach- and 
Spleen-Qi deficiency (in
which case the complexion would be pale yellow) or Dampness in
the Stomach and Spleen (in which case the complexion would be
bright yellow). A yellowish complexion in children may also
indicate retention of food.
Pale
A pale complexion in children generally indicates Qi or Yang
deficiency and usually of the Spleen or Lungs, or both.
Bluish-Greenish
A bluish complexion indicates Cold or shock, while a greenish
complexion indicates Wind or Pain. A greenish colour around the
mouth usually indicates Liver-Wind (in children normally after a
febrile disease), abdominal pain from Cold or Liver-Qi invading
the Spleen. A bluish colour on the forehead pertains to the Heart
and it indicates shock, while a bluish colour on both the forehead
and chin in a baby may indicate prenatal shock.
Box 22.1
 
summarizes the complexion colours.
 
BOX 22.1
 
   
 
COMPLEXION COLOURS
• 
 
Red: Heat
• 
 
Right cheek red: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Both cheeks red: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Pale yellow: Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Bright yellow: Dampness in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Dull yellow: retention of food
• 
 
Pale: Qi or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Bluish: cold or shock
• 
 
Greenish: Liver-Wind, abdominal pain from Cold,
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
• 
 
Bluish on the forehead: shock (heart)
• 
 
Bluish on the forehead and chin in a baby: prenatal
shock
534
ORIFICES
The orifices observed in children are the eyes, ears, nose, mouth,
urethra and anus.
Eyes
A redness of the sclera indicates either external Wind-Heat or
internal Heat. A yellowish colour of the sclera indicates Dampness,
while a bluish-greenish colour of the sclera indicates Liver-Wind.
Streaming red eyes may indicate measles. Red and cracked
corners of the eyes indicate Damp-Heat in the Intestines and
retention of food.
“White membrane on the pupil in children” is called 
Gan Yi
 
in
Chinese, which means Childhood Nutritional Impairment Nebula;
it consists of a white membrane covering the pupil, often starting
with the symptom of decreased vision at night. As its name
implies, it occurs in children suffering from nutritional
impairment. A nebula is a translucent, greyish corneal haze,
scarring or opacity. For a more detailed discussion of this sign, see
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 61
 
.
Box 22.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying eye signs.
 
BOX 22.2
 
   
 
EYES
• 
 
Red eyes: Wind-Heat or internal Heat
• 
 
Yellowish eyes: Dampness
• 
 
Bluish-greenish eyes: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Streaming, red eyes: measles
• 
 
Red and cracked corners of the eyes: Damp-Heat in
the Intestines
• 
 
White membrane on the pupil: Childhood Nutritional
Impairment
Ears
Small and contracted ears indicate poor hereditary Kidney
constitution. Redness at the back of the ears indicates Wind-Heat;
535
if the body is also hot and the face red, it may indicate chickenpox.
If the helix of the ear is bluish-greenish, it indicates either
abdominal pain from Cold or Liver-Wind after a febrile disease.
Box 22.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying ear signs.
 
BOX 22.3
 
   
 
EARS
• 
 
Small and contracted ears: poor hereditary Kidney
constitution
• 
 
Redness at the back of the ears: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Body hot and face red: chickenpox
• 
 
Bluish-greenish helix: abdominal pain from Cold,
Liver-Wind after febrile disease
Nose
A runny nose with white-watery discharge in acute cases indicates
an invasion of Wind-Cold. If the discharge is yellowish, this
indicates Wind-Heat. A white, 
watery nasal discharge in a chronic
condition indicates allergic rhinitis and it is due to Lung-Qi
deficiency.
A blocked nose with difficulty in breathing generally indicates
Dampness or Damp-Heat in the nose; this is very common in
children and it is usually a residual pathogenic factor after
repeated external invasions (especially when treated with
antibiotics). A flapping of the nostrils in a child with fever
indicates Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs and it is a relatively serious
sign. Sweating on the nose in chronic conditions indicates Lung-Qi
deficiency.
Box 22.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying nose signs.
 
BOX 22.4
 
   
 
NOSE
• 
 
Runny nose with watery white discharge (acute):
invasion of Wind-Cold
• 
 
Runny nose with yellowish discharge: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Runny nose with watery, white nasal discharge
(chronic): allergic rhinitis due to Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Blocked nose with breathing difficulty, especially in
536
children: Dampness or Damp-Heat in the nose
• 
 
Flapping of the nostrils with fever (children): Phlegm-
Heat in the Lungs
• 
 
Sweating on the nose (chronic): Lung-Qi deficiency
Mouth
Observation of the mouth includes observation of the lips, gums
and throat.
The lips pertain to the Spleen and pale lips indicate Spleen-Qi
deficiency whereas red lips indicate Heat in the Spleen and Heart.
If the lips are dark and dry, this indicates a severe injury of Yin
after a febrile disease.
Swollen and red gums indicate Stomach-Heat, retention of food
or worms.
The throat should always be observed in children. In acute cases,
a redness of the throat indicates Wind-Heat; in chronic cases, a
redness of the throat is often due to Heat in the Stomach and
Intestines.
Erosion, redness and swelling of the pharynx indicate Toxic
Heat. This is seen more frequently in children suffering from acute
upper respiratory infections.
Swollen tonsils of a normal colour indicate retention of
Dampness or Phlegm occurring against a background of Qi
deficiency. This is seen frequently in children with retention of a
residual pathogenic factor (e.g. Dampness or Phlegm) after
repeated acute upper respiratory infections.
A chronic swelling of the tonsils in children is often
accompanied by a chronic swelling of the adenoids, itself also a
sign of retention of residual Dampness or Phlegm.
Red and swollen tonsils indicate Heat or Toxic Heat often in the
Stomach or Large Intestine channel, or both. The tonsils should
always be inspected in acute invasions of Wind-Heat, particularly
in children. Red and swollen tonsils are frequently seen in children
during acute upper respiratory infections. During acute invasions
of Wind-Heat, a swelling and redness of the tonsils indicates a
537
more severe degree of Wind-Heat and often the presence of Toxic
Heat; it also points to an involvement of the Stomach or Large
Intestine channel, or both. It also tells us that the child probably
has a pre-existing condition of Heat, often Stomach-Heat.
A chronic redness and swelling of the tonsils that comes and
goes indicates either chronic Heat in the Stomach or Large
Intestine channel, or both (more common in children and often
due to a residual pathogenic factor), or Empty-Heat in the Lung
channel. In Chinese medicine, a chronic redness and swelling of
the tonsils was called “milky moth” (
ru
 
 
): the tonsils look like a
moth’s wings and have a milky fluid on them.
Red and swollen tonsils with exudate indicate Toxic Heat in the
Stomach or Large Intestine channel, or both; they are usually seen
during acute upper respiratory infections and are more common in
children. Their presence definitely indicates an invasion of Wind-
Heat (as opposed to Wind-Cold) and it indicates that it is
complicated by Toxic Heat.
A swelling of the tonsils from Toxic Heat was called “stone
moth” (
shi e
 
): the two tonsils look like a moth’s wings and have a
stony hardness.
In any of the above pathologies of the tonsils, if both tonsils are
affected, it generally indicates a greater severity than if only one is
affected.
Box 22.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying signs in the mouth,
lips, gums, throat and tonsils.
 
BOX 22.5
 
   
 
MOUTH, LIPS, GUMS,
THROAT AND TONSILS
• 
 
Pale lips: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Red lips: Spleen- and Heart-Heat
• 
 
Dark and dry lips: severe injury of Yin
• 
 
Swollen red gums: Stomach-Heat, Retention of food
or worms
• 
 
Red throat: Wind-Heat or Heat in Stomach and
Intestines
• 
 
Erosion, redness and swelling of the pharynx: Toxic
Heat
• 
 
Swollen tonsils: Dampness or Phlegm (background of
Qi deficiency)
538
• 
 
Red and swollen tonsils: Heat or Toxic Heat in the
Stomach/Large Intestine
• 
 
Red, swollen and purulent tonsils: Toxic Heat
• 
 
On-off chronic redness and swelling of the tonsils:
Heat in the Stomach/Large Intestine, Empty-Heat in the
Lungs
Urethra And Anus
A yellowish and wet skin in the genital area indicates Damp-Heat.
A persistent nappy (diaper) rash indicates Damp-Heat in the Liver
channel. A sore and irritated anus may indicate worms, while
itching in the anus at night may indicate pinworms.
BODY MOVEMENT
In general, the rules governing observation of children’s body
movements are the same as in adults. I will therefore highlight
only the aspects that are peculiar to children.
The most important difference between adults and children is
that it is normal for children to be much more active and to move
around during a consultation. Apart from this, the same principles
apply, that is, if the child is listless and excessively quiet it
indicates Deficiency, while if the child moves around excessively
and is hyperactive it indicates a Full condition. Full conditions
which may cause excessive movement in children are Heat in the
Stomach and Intestines, Heart-Fire or Liver-Fire.
When observing children’s body movements, allowance should
be made for any natural shyness of a child in the presence of a
doctor: for example, a child may be shy and extremely quiet during
the consultation but be a “terror” at home!
SPINAL MUSCLES
Observation of the spinal muscles is carried out principally in
babies. If the spinal muscles are very soft and flabby, this indicates
539
a constitutional Spleen deficiency.
INDEX FINGER
Veins On The Index Finger
In children under 3 years, observation of the index finger is used
for diagnosis of acute diseases. The three creases of the index
finger are called Wind Gate, Qi Gate and Life Gate, starting from
the proximal crease (
Fig. 22.1
 
). The left index finger is observed in
boys and the right index finger in girls. Observation is carried out
by rubbing the finger first and observing any veins appearing on
the side of the finger.
FIG. 22.1
 
Index finger Gates
Observation of the veins on the index finger in acute diseases in
children under 3 years is carried out first of all to assess the
seriousness of the condition. If any veins appearing on the finger
extend just beyond the Wind Gate, this indicates that the
pathogenic factor is in the Connecting channels only, it is relatively
light and the condition is benign. If any veins appearing on the
index finger extend just beyond the Qi Gate, the pathogenic factor
is in the Main channels, it is deeper and the condition is more
serious. If any veins on the finger extend just beyond the Life Gate,
the pathogenic factor is in the Internal Organs, it is deep and the
condition is life threatening.
The veins appearing on the index finger in young children
should be differentiated according to the following criteria:
 
• 
 
depth of colour
• 
 
intensity of colour
540
• 
 
actual colour
• 
 
movement of veins
• 
 
concentration of colour
• 
 
length of veins
• 
 
thickness.
Depth of colour
“Depth” of colour refers not to the shade but the visibility of the
veins on the finger. If the veins are superficial and clearly visible
on the surface, they indicate that the disease is on the Exterior and
is of external origin; if they are deep and hidden, it indicates either
that the disease is in the Interior and is of internal origin, or that
an external pathogenic factor has become internal.
Intensity of colour
“Intensity” of colour refers to its “thickness”: if it is thin, the
disease is benign; if it is “thick”, the disease is more severe. If the
veins disappear easily on massaging the finger, this indicates
Deficiency; if they do not disappear easily on massaging and look
“hidden”, it indicates Excess.
Actual colour
The actual colour of the veins should be observed. Fresh-red veins
indicate an external invasion of Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat, reddish-
purple veins the presence of internal Heat, bluish-purple veins
Wind-Heat, bluish veins a Liver-Wind condition, often with
convulsions, light-red veins Empty-Cold, white veins Childhood
Nutritional Impairment, yellow veins a Spleen condition, and
dark-purple veins an obstruction of the Blood Connecting
channels.
Movement of veins
The “movement” of the veins refers to a vein that is relatively thick
and pulsates strongly but not smoothly and looks congested. This
may indicate a Full condition with strong pathogenic factors:
541
stagnation of Qi and Blood, stagnation of Damp-Phlegm or
retention of food.
Concentration of colour
Concentration of colour refers to the density of the colour of the
veins: a concentrated colour is “tightly packed” whereas a less
concentrated one is more sparse.
The more concentrated the colour, the more severe the disease.
The degree of concentration also indicates the character of the
pattern - that is, a more concentrated colour indicates a Full
condition and a sparse one an Empty condition.
Length of veins
The length of the veins should be observed: long veins indicate
that the disease is progressing and short veins that the disease is
retreating.
Thickness
The thickness of the veins should also be observed: thick veins
indicate Heat and Full conditions, whereas thin veins indicate Cold
and Empty conditions.
Box 22.6
 
summarizes patterns indicated by the index finger vein.
 
BOX 22.6
 
   
 
VEINS ON THE INDEX
FINGER
Depth
• 
 
Superficial: Exterior disease
• 
 
Deep: Interior disease
Intensity
• 
 
Thin: benign disease
• 
 
Thick: severe disease
• 
 
Veins that disappear on massaging: Deficiency
• 
 
“Hidden” veins that don’t disappear: Excess
Colour
• 
 
Fresh-red: external Wind
542
• 
 
Reddish-purple: internal Heat
• 
 
Bluish-purple: Wind-Heat
• 
 
Bluish: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Light-red: Empty-Cold
• 
 
White: Childhood Nutritional Impairment
• 
 
Yellow: Spleen deficiency
• 
 
Dark-purple: Blood stasis
Movement
• 
 
Thick vein pulsating strongly: Full condition, strong
pathogenic factors
Length
• 
 
Long: disease progressing
• 
 
Short: disease retreating
Thickness
• 
 
Thick: Heat, Full conditions
• 
 
Thin: Cold, Empty conditions
Creases On The Index Finger
The palmar surface of the index finger should be observed for
creases. A round crease with a “tail”, called “long pearl” in
traditional Chinese medicine (
Fig. 22.2
 
), indicates Accumulation
Disorder. A round crease without a tail, called “flowing pearl”,
indicates internal Heat (
Fig. 22.3
 
).
543
FIG. 22.2
 
“Long pearl” crease
FIG. 22.3
 
“Flowing pearl” crease
A long crease which looks like a snake with its head on the distal
end of the palmar surface of the index finger, called “snake going
away”, indicates a digestive problem characterized by vomiting
and diarrhoea (
Fig. 22.4
 
). A long crease which looks like a snake
with 
its head on the proximal end of the palmar surface of the
index finger, called “snake returning”, indicates Accumulation
Disorder (
Fig. 22.5
 
).
544
FIG. 22.4
 
“Snake going away” crease
FIG. 22.5
 
“Snake returning” crease
A crease looking like a bow facing away from the middle finger,
called “bow facing inside”, indicates an external invasion of Wind
(
Fig. 22.6
 
). A crease 
looking like a bow facing towards the middle
finger, called “bow facing outside”, indicates Phlegm-Heat (
Fig.
22.7
 
).
545
FIG. 22.6
 
“Bow facing inside” crease
FIG. 22.7
 
“Bow facing outside” crease
A diagonal crease extending from the radial to the ulnar side
with the upper part on the ulnar side indicates an external invasion
of Wind-Cold (
Fig. 22.8
 
). A diagonal crease extending from the
ulnar to the radial side with its upper part on the radial side
indicates an external invasion of Cold (
Fig. 22.9
 
).
546
FIG. 22.8
 
Diagonal crease extending from the radial to the ulnar
side
FIG. 22.9
 
Diagonal crease extending from the ulnar to the radial
side
A straight crease which looks like a needle (
Fig. 22.10
 
) or, if
longer, like a spear (
Fig. 22.11
 
), indicates Phlegm-Heat. A long,
vertical crease extending through the whole index finger indicates
an excess pattern of the Liver (often involving Liver-Wind) with
severe Spleen deficiency (
Fig. 22.12
 
).
547
FIG. 22.10
 
“Needle” crease
FIG. 22.11
 
“Spear” crease
548
FIG. 22.12
 
Long, vertical crease
A curved crease indicates Liver-Wind (
Fig. 22.13
 
). A crease with
its end shaped like a hook indicates deficiency of Yang of the
Stomach and Spleen with internal Cold (
Fig. 22.14
 
). A curved
crease with three bends that looks like a worm indicates
Accumulation Disorder (
Fig. 22.15
 
). Three creases that resemble
the 
Chinese character for “Water” (somewhat like two letters “k”
back to back) indicate chronic cough (
Fig. 22.16
 
). A curved crease
which looks like an “s” indicates chronic vomiting and diarrhoea
and Childhood Nutritional Impairment (
Fig. 22.17
 
).
FIG. 22.13
 
Curved crease
549
FIG. 22.14
 
Crease with end shaped like a hook
FIG. 22.15
 
“Worm” crease
550
FIG. 22.16
 
Three creases
FIG. 22.17
 
S-shaped crease
A long crease that looks like a fish-bone indicates Liver-Wind
and convulsions (
Fig. 22.18
 
). A crease 
dividing out into two small
branches at its upper end also indicates Liver-Wind and
convulsions (
Fig. 22.19
 
). Three squiggly creases indicate intestinal
worms (
Fig. 22.20
 
).
551
FIG. 22.18
 
“Fish-bone” crease
FIG. 22.19
 
Branching out crease
552
FIG. 22.20
 
Three irregular creases
ROOT OF THE NOSE
The root of the nose (the part of the nose between the eyes) can be
used diagnostically in children under the age of 4 years. It reflects
specifically the condition of the Stomach and Spleen (
Fig. 22.21
 
).
FIG. 22.21
 
The root of the nose area
If the root of the nose is dark-greenish, it indicates retention of
food or, in infants, problems with feeding and generally a Full
condition.
If the root of the nose is light-greenish, it indicates digestive
problems of an Empty nature. If there are bluish blood vessels on
the root of the nose, it indicates abdominal pain due to retention
of food or Cold.
Greenish maculae on the root of the nose indicate chronic
553
diarrhoea from retention of food.
Box 22.7
 
summarizes patterns reflected by the root of the nose.
 
BOX 22.7
 
   
 
ROOT OF THE NOSE
• 
 
Dark greenish: retention of food
• 
 
Light greenish: Empty condition
• 
 
Bluish vessels: abdominal pain
• 
 
Greenish macules: chronic diarrhoea
554
SECTION 3
TONGUE
DIAGNOSIS
555
 
TONGUE
DIAGNOSIS
Section contents
23. 
 
Tongue diagnosis
24. 
 
Tongue-body colour
25. 
 
Tongue-body shape
26. 
 
Tongue coating
27. 
 
Tongue images and patterns
INTRODUCTION
Tongue diagnosis is a very important part of diagnosis by
observation. The strength of tongue diagnosis lies in its clarity and
objectivity. Especially when compared with pulse diagnosis,
tongue diagnosis is quite objective: when a tongue is too Red or
too Pale, this can be observed objectively. Another important
strength of tongue diagnosis is its capacity to shed light on
complicated conditions. For example, a simultaneous deficiency of
Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang is quite common in women over 40
and especially in menopausal women. This simultaneous
deficiency can give rise to confusing hot and cold manifestations:
the tongue will indicate quite clearly whether there is a
predominance of Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
The principal aspects of tongue diagnosis are the tongue-body
colour, the tongue-body shape and the coating. The tongue reflects
556
the state of the Internal Organs and that of Qi and Blood. From the
Eight-Principle point of view, it clearly reflects Heat–Cold, Full–
Empty and Yin–Yang conditions.
For a more detailed discussion of tongue diagnosis see G
Maciocia, 1995, ‘Tongue Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine’, Eastland
Press, Seattle.
557
CHAPTER 23
 
TONGUE
DIAGNOSIS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CONDITIONS FOR EXAMINING THE TONGUE
Lighting
Techniques of observation of the tongue
External factors affecting the colour of the
tongue
AREAS OF THE TONGUE
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TONGUE
Tongue-body colour
Tongue-body shape
Tongue coating
Tongue spirit
CONDITIONS FOR EXAMINING THE
TONGUE
558
Lighting
Proper lighting is absolutely essential for a correct examination of
the tongue and the only good lighting is natural light on a sunny
day. The room where the patient is examined should have an
abundant source of natural light; for example, no proper natural
light can ever be achieved in a basement. Even in daylight, the
colour of the tongue can be interpreted properly indoors only if
the day is sunny. On a cloudy day the colour of the tongue cannot
be accurately observed indoors; if the patient is examined on such
a day, it is advisable when observing the tongue to ask the patient
to stand next to a window or even outdoors. Obviously, it is seldom
possible to achieve ideal conditions. If it is necessary to observe
the tongue on a cloudy day or in the afternoon or evening, I find
that the best artificial light is that of a halogen bulb and the best
way to observe the tongue is by means of a table lamp fitted with
one of these bulbs.
Techniques Of Observation Of The Tongue
One should not ask the patient to hold the tongue out for longer
than approximately 15 seconds because the longer the tongue is
extended the darker it will tend to become. If we need longer than
15 seconds to observe the tongue, which we normally do, we
should ask the patient to withdraw the tongue, close the mouth
and extend the tongue again; this can be done several times
without affecting its body colour.
It is very important to examine the tongue systematically
following always the same order, which should be as follows:
 
• 
 
tongue-body colour
• 
 
tongue-body shape
• 
 
coating
• 
 
tongue spirit.
I would strongly recommend following this systematic order of
observation of the tongue because the above order reflects the
559
relative clinical importance of each item. For example, the tongue-
body colour reflects conditions of Heat or Cold and deficiency of
Yin or Yang in various organs, and especially the Yin organs; it
should therefore be always the first aspect to be observed. The
tongue-body shape often simply adds information to that gleaned
from observation of the tongue-body colour; for example, if the
tongue is Pale from Yang deficiency, its swelling will simply
indicate that the Yang deficiency is particularly pronounced. The
tongue coating reflects more the condition of the Yang organs and
it is easily influenced by short-term factors, which makes it
relatively less important than observation of the tongue-body
colour in chronic conditions.
External Factors Affecting The Colour Of
The Tongue
The most obvious external factors affecting the colour of the
tongue are highly coloured foods, sweets, drinks or pastilles. If a
patient’s tongue has a very obvious, unusual, bright colour, always
ask what he or she has been eating.
Spicy foods such as cayenne pepper and curry may tend to make
the tongue slightly redder soon after consumption. Tobacco
smoking usually colours the coating yellow, and in regular
smokers this is permanent. However, this cannot be written off as
no more than a false appearance due to an external factor; in fact,
tobacco, which has a hot energy, will tend to create Heat.
Medicines
Some medicines affect the appearance of the tongue and the most
common ones are antibiotics. These tend to make the tongue
partially peeled, that is, the loss of small patches of coating.
Therefore, when I see such a tongue, the first thing I ask is
whether the patient is on antibiotics or has taken them recently
(
Fig. 23.1
 
). In my experience, the effect of the antibiotics on the
tongue lasts for about 2 weeks after stopping the course. Judging
from the effects of antibiotics on the tongue, we can deduce that
they injure Stomach-Yin.
560
FIG. 23.1
 
Partially peeled tongue from antibiotics
Oral corticosteroids tend to make the tongue Red and Swollen,
while inhaled bronchodilators (such as salbutamol) may cause the
tip of the tongue to become Red, but only after many years of use.
Anti-inflammatory drugs such as phenylbutazone paradoxically
cause the tongue to develop red points.
Most cytotoxic drugs used for cancer tend to create a very thick,
dark-yellow or brown coating and also to make the tongue-body
Red.
AREAS OF THE TONGUE
In men and women alike, the tongue-body can be divided into
three areas: the rear corresponding to the Lower Burner, the
middle to the Middle Burner and the front to the Upper Burner
(
Fig. 23.2
 
).
FIG. 23.2
 
Divisions of the tongue according to the Three Burners
561
Therefore, according to this division, the front third of the
tongue reflects the state of the Heart and Lungs, the middle third
that of the Stomach, Spleen, Liver and Gall-Bladder and the rear
third that of the Kidneys, Bladder and Intestines. 
Figure 23.3
illustrates the areas corresponding to the Internal Organs in detail.
FIG. 23.3
 
Divisions of the tongue according to the Internal Organs
The relative position of the Heart and Lung areas on the tongue
should be explained in relation to redness, swelling, cracks or
Purple colour.
When there is Lung-Heat, this will make the whole front of the
tongue Red 
including
 
the Heart area (even though the Heat is only
in the Lungs and not in the Heart) (
Fig. 23.4
 
); when there is Heart-
Heat only the tip of the tongue becomes Red (
Fig. 23.5
 
).
FIG. 23.4
 
Tongue indicating Lung-Heat (Red in the front third)
562
FIG. 23.5
 
Tongue indicating Heart-Heat (Red tip)
As far as swelling is concerned, a swelling of the tip itself
indicates a Heart pathology, usually Heart-Heat. (
Fig. 23.6
 
). A
Lung-related swelling usually appears either in the whole front
third (
Fig. 23.7
 
) or on the sides between the Heart area and the
Stomach and Spleen area (
Fig. 23.8
 
).
FIG. 23.6
 
Swelling in Heart area
FIG. 23.7
 
Swelling in Lung area (front third)
563
FIG. 23.8
 
Swelling in Lung area (sides)
As far as cracks are concerned, Lung cracks are usually located
in the area between the tip and the centre (
Fig. 23.9
 
).
FIG. 23.9
 
Lung cracks
A Purple colour on the sides of the tongue between the tip and
centre may be related to the Lungs or Heart. It indicates Blood
stasis and, in lung disease, it is seen in chronic asthma or
emphysema, while in heart disease it is seen in coronary heart
disease or angina. The Purple patch may be unilateral or bilateral
(
Fig. 23.10
 
). In women, in addition, a Purple colour in that area
may also indicate a breast pathology.
564
FIG. 23.10
 
Purple colour in chest area (Lungs or Heart, in women
also the breast)
Although the sides of the tongue correspond to Liver and Gall-
Bladder, they may also, under certain circumstances, reflect
conditions of the Spleen. A pathology of the Liver, such as Heat, is
reflected along the whole side of the tongue, while one of the
Spleen is also reflected on the sides but only in the central section.
This applies to both redness and swelling, and 
Figures 23.11
 
and
23.12
 
illustrate this difference.
FIG. 23.11
 
The sides in Liver pathology
565
FIG. 23.12
 
The sides in Spleen pathology
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
TONGUE
The importance of tongue diagnosis lies mostly in the fact that it
nearly always shows the true condition of the patient; this is, of
course, most useful in complicated conditions when there may be
contradictory signs of Heat and Cold or of Yin and Yang deficiency.
For example, in menopausal conditions, when there is often a
simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang and
contradictory symptoms of Heat and Cold, the tongue clearly
shows whether there is a predominance of Yin or Yang deficiency
as it will be Red in the former case and Pale in the latter.
The clinical significance of the tongue must be related to its
various aspects as follows.
Tongue-Body Colour
The tongue-body colour reflects primarily the state of the Yin
organs and Blood and it shows conditions of Heat or Cold and of
Yin or Yang deficiency.
The tongue body’s own colour is visible through the tongue
coating and it is important not to confuse the two. Generally
speaking, the tongue coating does not extend right to the edge of
the tongue and therefore the sides of the tongue can show us the
tongue-body colour if the coating is very thick. Observation of the
tongue-body colour includes that of red points, which usually, but
not always, occur on a Red tongue.
566
Examination of the body colour should also always include an
examination of the veins under the tongue.
The normal Stomach fluids tend to make the tongue Pale
whereas Heart-Blood tends to redden it; the influence of these two
organs therefore causes the normal tongue to be Pale Red
indicating a good state of Stomach fluids and Heart-Blood.
Tongue-Body Shape
The tongue-body shape reflects primarily conditions of Deficiency
or Excess and observation of it adds more information to that
gleaned from the tongue-body colour.
Observation of the tongue-body shape includes consideration of
the shape itself: its thickness (Thin, Swollen, etc.), its suppleness
(Stiff, Flabby, etc.), its surface (cracks, etc.), and its involuntary
movements (Quivering, Moving, etc.).
The normal tongue-body shape is supple, not Swollen, not Thin
and without cracks.
Tongue Coating
The tongue coating reflects primarily the state of the Yang organs
and especially of the Stomach. It also reflects conditions of
Deficiency or Excess and of Heat or Cold.
The tongue coating is formed when some of the fluids generated
in the process of the Stomach’s digestion of food flow up and
create its coating. A thin, white tongue coating, therefore, indicates
a good state of Stomach-Qi while a rootless or an absent tongue
coating indicates weakening of Stomach-Qi.
The tongue coating should be thin enough for the tongue-body
colour to be seen through it.
Tongue Spirit
The tongue “spirit” refers to the general appearance of the tongue:
this is called 
shen
 
in Chinese and it is much the same as the 
shen
 
of
the complexion and eyes, (i.e. referring to the qualities of
brightness, sheen and vitality). One can therefore distinguish two
types of tongue: one with spirit, the other without spirit.
567
A tongue with spirit denotes certain qualities of liveliness,
suppleness, vitality and brightness of the tongue-body; a tongue
without spirit looks lifeless, rather stiff, rather dark and dull.
A tongue without spirit denotes a poor prognosis or that the
condition is more difficult to treat.
For a detailed discussion of tongue diagnosis see “Tongue
Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine”.
 
1
NOTES
1. 
G Maciocia 1995 Tongue Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine,
Eastland Press, Seattle
568
CHAPTER 24
 
TONGUE-BODY
COLOUR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
TONGUE SPIRIT
TONGUE-BODY COLOURS
Pale
Red
Purple
SUBLINGUAL VEINS
TONGUE SPIRIT
The tongue “spirit” refers to the general appearance of the tongue:
this is called 
shen
 
in Chinese and it is much the same as the 
shen
 
of
the complexion and eyes, that is, referring to the qualities of
brightness, sheen and vitality. One can therefore distinguish two
types of tongue: one with spirit, the other without spirit.
A tongue with spirit denotes certain qualities of liveliness,
suppleness, vitality and brightness of the tongue body; a tongue
without spirit looks lifeless, rather stiff, rather dark and dull. One
569
can use the analogy of a piece of meat in a butcher’s shop: the
tongue with spirit looks like a fresh piece of meat, while the
tongue without spirit looks like an old piece of meat which has
become dark, greyish and lifeless.
The spirit should be observed in particular on the root of the
tongue because the root reflects the state of the Kidneys and the
spirit of this area reflects the condition of the Kidney-Essence. The
Kidney-Essence is the foundation of life and the absence of spirit
on the root of the tongue indicates a severe deficiency of the
Kidneys and therefore the tendency to ill health. The tongue spirit
is basically a prognostic sign as a tongue with spirit indicates that
the patient may recover relatively easily whereas a tongue without
spirit indicates that, whatever the patient may suffer from, the
treatment may be prolonged.
It is important to remember that the tongue spirit has nothing
to do with other pathological signs on the tongue; in other words,
the patient may have a tongue that is pathological in many
respects (e.g. Red with a thick coating), but if it has spirit this
indicates that the Kidney-Essence is still strong and that the body
can fight off pathogenic factors.
TONGUE-BODY COLOURS
The tongue-body colour reflects primarily the state of the Yin
organs and Blood and it shows conditions of Heat or Cold and of
Yin or Yang deficiency. The normal body colour is pale red.
Traditionally five pathological colours are described, that is, Pale,
Red, Dark-Red, Purple and Blue. However, the clinical significance
of the Dark-Red tongue is essentially the same as that of the Red
tongue and the clinical significance of the Blue tongue is
essentially the same as that of the Bluish-Purple tongue: therefore,
the pathological colours may be narrowed down to three: Pale, Red
and Purple.
Pale
The Pale tongue is paler than normal. The pallor ranges from a
very slight paleness to a paleness so extreme that the tongue is
570
almost white. (See 
Plate 24.1 on p. P22
 
)
The Pale tongue indicates either Yang deficiency or Blood
deficiency; in Yang deficiency it will tend to be slightly wet,
whereas in Blood deficiency it will tend to be slightly dry. The
latter is much more common in women. If it is only slightly Pale
this may also indicate Qi deficiency.
The tongue is often Pale only on the sides. If the pallor is all
along the sides this indicates Liver-Blood deficiency; if it is only in
the central section it indicates Spleen-Blood deficiency. In severe
cases of Liver-Blood deficiency the sides may also become orangey.
The Pale tongue normally has a coating, and a Pale tongue
without coating indicates severe Blood deficiency; this is relatively
rare and it is usually seen only in women.
Box 24.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a Pale tongue.
 
BOX 24.1
 
   
 
PALE TONGUE
• 
 
Pale and slightly wet: Yang deficiency
• 
 
Pale and slightly dry: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Slightly pale; Qi deficiency
• 
 
Pale on the sides all along edges: Liver-Blood
deficiency
• 
 
Pale on the sides in central section: Spleen-Blood
deficiency
• 
 
Pale-orangey or pale without coating: severe Liver-
Blood deficiency
Red
The Red tongue is redder than the normal colour. Although
traditionally two shades are described (i.e. Red or Dark-Red), the
clinical significance of these two is essentially the same. (See 
Plate
24.2 on p. P22
 
.)
A Red tongue always indicates Heat, which may be Full or
Empty. Therefore, when we observe a Red tongue the first thing we
should ask ourselves is whether it has a coating or not. If the
tongue is Red with a coating with root (whatever its colour) this
indicates Full-Heat; if the tongue is Red without a coating, or
571
coated only partially, or with a rootless coating (whatever its
colour), it indicates Empty-Heat.
It should be stressed that a Red tongue without coating
indicates specifically Empty-Heat rather than Yin deficiency,
although obviously it arises from the latter. In other words, it is the
lack of coating that indicates the Yin deficiency and the redness
(without coating) that indicates Empty-Heat. The implication of
this is, of course, that there are many tongue types that indicate
Yin deficiency while the tongue-body is not Red.
Box 24.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying Red tongue and
tongue coating.
 
BOX 24.2
 
   
 
RED TONGUE AND TONGUE
COATING
• 
 
Red tongue with coating: Full-Heat
• 
 
Red tongue without coating: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Normal tongue without coating: Yin deficiency
The tongue-body may be Red in specific areas, especially the tip,
the front third, the centre or the sides. A Red tip of the tongue (
Fig.
24.1
 
) indicates Heart-Heat (Full or Empty); if the tip only is Red,
this indicates that the condition of Heart-Heat is slight, whereas if
the whole tongue is Red and the tip redder it indicates that 
there is
generalized Heat and severe Heart-Heat. (See 
Plate 24.3 on p. P22
 
.)
FIG. 24.1
 
Red tip
Red sides all along the edge indicate Liver-Heat (
Fig. 24.2
 
, see
572
also 
Plate 24.4 on p. P22
 
), while a redness on the sides only in the
central section indicates either Stomach-Heat or Spleen-Heat (
Fig.
24.3
 
).
FIG. 24.2
 
Liver-Heat
FIG. 24.3
 
Spleen-Heat
If the tongue is Red in the centre it indicates Stomach-Heat (
Fig.
24.4
 
); if it is Red in the front third (including the tip) it indicates
Lung-Heat (
Fig. 24.5
 
).
573
FIG. 24.4
 
Stomach-Heat
FIG. 24.5
 
Lung-Heat
Red points
Before defining red points, we should define the red “grains”.
Ancient Chinese books on tongue diagnosis say that the
physiological Minister Fire ascending to communicate with the
Heart forms red grains on the surface of the tongue (bearing in
mind that the tongue is the offshoot of the Heart). These red
grains are normal and indicate that the physiological Minister Fire
is in a healthy state, that is, it is neither excessive nor deficient.
When the Minister Fire becomes pathological from various life
influences, it flares upwards causing the red grains to become
redder and to protrude from the surface of the tongue so that they
become more visible: when this happens they are called red
“points”. Therefore red points are always pathological and they
indicate a pathological state of the Minister Fire flaring upwards.
Red points always indicate Heat to a degree greater than when the
tongue is just Red. The intensity of their colour and their
574
distribution clearly correlate with the intensity of the Heat: the
more intense the colour and the more dense the distribution, the
stronger is the Heat. (See 
Plate 24.5 on p. P22
 
.)
Red “spots” look the same as red points except that they are
larger and they are usually seen only on the root of the tongue.
Like red points, red spots also indicate Heat but with the
additional component of some Blood stasis.
Red points are frequently seen on the tip, sides, centre or root of
the tongue. Red points on the tip are relatively common and they
indicate Heart-Fire, usually deriving from emotional stress. Red
points on the sides in the Liver area indicate Liver-Heat (Liver-
Fire), whereas red points in the centre indicate Stomach-Heat (
Fig.
24.6
 
). However, Stomach-Heat may also be reflected in red points
on the sides but only in the middle section of the tongue and along
a broader strip.
FIG. 24.6
 
Red points indicating Liver-Heat or Stomach-Heat
With Lung-Heat, red points may appear either in the chest area
or in the whole front third of the tongue, as opposed to the very tip
as in the case of Heart-Heat (
Fig. 24.7
 
).
575
FIG. 24.7
 
Red points indicating Lung-Heat
Red points on the root indicate Heat, usually Damp-Heat, in the
Bladder or Intestines.
Red points in external diseases
The significance of red points in external diseases is different from
that in internal diseases. First of all, red points in acute external
diseases definitely indicate an invasion of Wind-Heat as opposed
to Wind-Cold.
In external diseases the density of the red points reflects not
only the intensity of the pathogenic factor but also its progression
towards the Interior; thus if, in the course of an acute external
disease, the red points become denser this indicates not only that
the pathogenic factor has become stronger but that it is beginning
to penetrate into the Interior.
The distribution of the red points also reflects the stages of
penetration of an external pathogenic factor. In the very beginning
stages of an invasion of external Wind, the red points may be more
concentrated on the front third or on the sides. In this context,
these two areas correspond to the Exterior of the body while the
centre of the tongue corresponds to the Interior (
Fig. 24.8
 
).
576
FIG. 24.8
 
Areas corresponding to Interior and Exterior in acute,
external diseases
Thus if after a few days, the red points from these two areas
extend towards the centre of the tongue, it indicates that a
pathogenic factor is penetrating into the Interior.
Box 24.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying red points on the
tongue.
 
BOX 24.3
 
   
 
RED POINTS
• 
 
Red points: Heat
• 
 
Red spots: Heat with some Blood stasis
• 
 
Red points on the tip: Heart-Fire
• 
 
Red points on the sides: Liver-Heat
• 
 
Red points in the centre: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Red points on the sides in central section: Stomach-
Heat
• 
 
Red points on the sides in chest area: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Red spots on the root: Damp-Heat in the Lower
Burner
• 
 
Red points in external diseases: Wind-Heat
Purple
A Purple tongue always indicates Blood stasis, which itself may
derive from Cold or from Heat. (See 
Plates 24.6
 
, 
24.7
 
and 
25.3 on
pp. P22, P23 and P24
 
.) Internal Cold contracts and obstructs the
circulation of Blood, leading to Blood stasis; Heat leads to Blood
577
stasis by condensing the Body Fluids and Blood. When Blood
stasis derives from Cold, the tongue is Bluish-Purple while when it
derives from Heat, it is Reddish-Purple. Therefore the Bluish-
Purple tongue indicating Cold derives from a Pale tongue while
the Reddish-Purple tongue derives from a Red tongue (
Fig. 24.9
 
).
FIG. 24.9
 
Development of Bluish-Purple or Reddish-Purple tongue
A tongue becomes Purple only after a prolonged time, usually
years: therefore it always indicates a chronic condition and for this
reason it is far more common in the elderly. The Purple colour of
the tongue indicates potentially serious conditions and in the
presence of such tongue-body colour we should always invigorate
Blood and eliminate stasis (as well as expelling internal Cold in the
case of Blood stasis deriving from Cold and clearing Heat in the
case of Blood stasis deriving from Heat), even in the absence of
any symptom of Blood stasis. Serious conditions relating to Blood
stasis in Chinese medicine include cancer, coronary heart disease,
stroke and hypertension.
The tongue can be only partially Purple and the most common
areas are the sides (Liver or chest area) 
of the tongue, the centre
and the front third; the most frequent occurrence is on the sides in
the Liver area. Strangely, the tongue is never Purple on the tip only
and Blood stasis in the Heart usually manifests in the chest/breast
area instead (see below).
A Purple colour on the sides in the Liver area (
Fig. 24.10
 
)
indicates Blood stasis in the Liver, which may occur in any of the
areas influenced by the Liver channel, for example Liver-Blood
578
stasis in the hypochondrium, epigastrium, lower abdomen and
Uterus. (See 
Plate 24.8 on p. P23
 
.) It is interesting to note that,
although the Uterus is in the Lower Burner, whose state is
reflected in the back third of the tongue, Blood stasis in the Uterus
is manifested with a Purple colour not on the root of the tongue
but on the sides in the Liver area.
FIG. 24.10
 
Liver area
A Purple colour on the sides in the chest area (
Fig. 24.11
 
)
indicates Blood stasis in the chest (which may include Heart or
Lungs) or, in women only, the breasts. In lung diseases, a Purple
colour in the chest area is seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease such as chronic asthma, bronchitis or emphysema. In heart
diseases, a Purple colour in the chest area is seen in coronary heart
disease. In addition, in women a Purple colour in the chest/breast
area may indicate a breast pathology such as breast lumps,
whether benign or malignant. Observation of the breast area in
women suffering from carcinoma of the breast is an important
prognostic factor because if this area is clearly Purple the
prognosis is poor, whereas if it is not the prognosis is good. A
Purple colour in the breast area is also sometimes seen in women
without any breast pathology; this may indicate the predisposition
to breast lumps and one should therefore invigorate Blood and
eliminate stasis in the breasts even in the absence of symptoms
and signs. (See 
Plate 24.9 on p. P23
 
.)
579
FIG. 24.11
 
Breast/chest areas
A Purple colour in the centre of the tongue indicates Blood stasis
in the Stomach, whereas a Purple colour in the front third
indicates Blood stasis in the Lungs.
Box 24.4
 
summarizes patterns underlying Purple tongue areas.
 
BOX 24.4
 
   
 
PURPLE AREAS ON THE
TONGUE
• 
 
Liver areas: Liver-Blood stasis or Blood stasis in the
Uterus
• 
 
Breast/chest areas: Blood stasis in the Heart or breast
• 
 
Centre: Blood stasis in the Stomach
SUBLINGUAL VEINS
The sublingual veins should always form part of a routine
examination of the tongue body. Under normal conditions, the two
veins under the tongue are barely visible and they have a very
faint, pale-red colour. 
When they become clearly visible, they are
by definition pathological. (See 
Plate 24.10 on p. P23
 
.) One should
observe the size and the colour of the sublingual veins.
If the veins are distended but not dark, this indicates Qi
deficiency, if they are too thin in relation to the sides of the tongue
and the patient’s body itself, this indicates Yin deficiency.
The most important sign with regard to sublingual veins is their
Purple colour. If they are distended and dark Purple, this indicates
Blood stasis, usually in the Upper Burner (Lungs or Heart) but it
may also refer to the Liver. Distended and dark sublingual veins
580
are more common in the elderly and they give an early indication
of Blood stasis before the rest of the tongue body becomes Purple.
Observation of the sublingual veins therefore has an important
preventative value. Dark and dry sublingual veins indicate severe
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat. Dark, swollen and wet veins
indicate Lung, Spleen and Kidney deficiency with accumulation of
fluids.
Such observation is important also in chronic Painful
Obstruction Syndrome. If the sublingual veins are reddish and
shiny, they indicate Damp-Heat; if they are yellowish, Dampness,
while if they are white and slippery, Cold-Dampness, and if they
are swollen, white and sticky, Dampness and Blood stasis.
 
• 
 
dark-purple: hardening of the brain arteries
• 
 
distended, dark and crooked: hardening of arteries,
hypertension (if the veins protrude a lot and look like
earthworms, the disease is severe)
• 
 
small nodules like rice or wheat grains: hardening of
arteries and heart disease.
In modern China, some doctors consider the appearance of
sublingual veins as a useful prodromal sign of certain diseases.
 
1
The main signs are as follows:
Boxes 24.5
 
and 
24.6
 
summarize the conditions underlying
sublingual veins in Chinese and Western medicine.
 
BOX 24.5
 
   
 
SUBLINGUAL VEINS
• 
 
Distended (not dark): Qi deficiency
• 
 
Thin: Yin deficiency
• 
 
Distended and dark: Blood stasis in the Upper Burner
• 
 
Dark and dry: severe Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Dark, swollen and wet: Lung, Spleen and Kidney
deficiency with accumulation of fluids
• 
 
Reddish and shiny: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Yellowish: Dampness
• 
 
White and slippery: Cold-Dampness
• 
 
Swollen, white and sticky: Dampness and Blood stasis
581
 
BOX 24.6
 
   
 
SUBLINGUAL VEINS IN
WESTERN MEDICINE
• 
 
Dark purple: hardening of the brain arteries
• 
 
Distended, dark and crooked: hardening of arteries,
hypertension (if the veins protrude a lot and look like
earthworms, the disease is severe)
• 
 
Small nodules like rice or wheat grains: hardening of
arteries and heart disease
NOTES
1. 
Min, Zhang Shu, The Diagnostic Significance of Sub-
lingual Veins in Arteriosclerosis (
She Xia Mai Luo Zai Zhen
Duan Dong Mai Ying Hua Zhong de Yi Yi
 
). 
Journal of Chinese Medicine (
 Zhong Yi Za Zhi 
 
) 2000;
(12):759.
582
CHAPTER 25
 
TONGUE-BODY
SHAPE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THIN
SWOLLEN
PARTIALLY SWOLLEN
STIFF
FLACCID
LONG
SHORT
CRACKED
DEVIATED
MOVING
QUIVERING
TOOTHMARKED
INTRODUCTION
Observation of the tongue-body shape reveals primarily conditions
583
of Deficiency or Excess and it adds more information to that
gleaned from observation of the tongue-body colour. For example,
a Pale tongue may indicate Yang deficiency, but if, in addition to
being Pale, it is also very Swollen this indicates that the Yang
deficiency is severe and that it has led to the accumulation of
Dampness or Phlegm. In this example, the tongue-body shape
reflects the Full condition generated by Dampness or Phlegm.
To give another example, if a tongue lacks coating, this indicates
Yin deficiency, but if in addition it is also very thin it indicates that
the Yin deficiency is quite severe. In this example, the tongue-body
shape reflects the severity of a deficiency condition. To give yet
another example, if the tip of the tongue is Red this indicates
Heart-Heat or Heart-Fire usually deriving from emotional
problems, but if the tip is also swollen it indicates that a condition
of Heart-Heat or Heart-Fire is more severe.
THIN
“Thin” refers to the thickness, not the width, of the tongue. The
“body” of the tongue is formed by fluids and Blood and a Thin
tongue therefore always indicates a deficiency either of Blood or of
Yin fluids. In the former case, it will also be Pale while in the latter
case it will be Red.
A Thin tongue is actually not common, probably because
Dampness and Phlegm, which make the tongue Swollen, are such
common and predominant pathogenic factors. As they tend to
make the tongue Swollen, even if the patient has a concurrent
severe 
Blood deficiency, this would not manifest on the tongue-
body shape. In my practice, for example, out of 2378 patients, less
than 2% have a Thin tongue while nearly 37% have a Swollen
tongue.
SWOLLEN
The size of the tongue body has to be related to the size of the
head of the person: what might be “Swollen” for someone may be
normal for another. (See 
Plate 25.1 on p. P23
 
.) As the thickness of
the tongue body depends on the supply of fluids and Blood, a
584
Swollen tongue body indicates an accumulation of fluids, which
may be Dampness, Phlegm or oedema. Thus a swelling of the
tongue always indicates a Full condition and particularly one
characterized by Dampness or Phlegm. Although Dampness and
Phlegm usually arise from a Qi or a Yang deficiency, the swelling of
the tongue body reflects the Full condition created by these two
pathogenic factors.
PARTIALLY SWOLLEN
While a total swelling of the tongue always indicates Dampness or
Phlegm, a partial swelling may indicate other pathologies such as
Qi deficiency, Qi stagnation or Heat. The areas where a partial
swelling is most commonly seen are the sides in the Liver or chest
area, the tip and the front third.
A swelling on the sides in the Liver area (
Fig. 25.1
 
) is very
common and it usually indicates Liver-Heat; it is nearly always
associated with a Red colour in the same area.
FIG. 25.1
 
Swelling in the Liver area
A swelling on the sides in the chest/breast area (
Fig. 25.2
 
)
generally indicates either retention of Phlegm in the chest or
breast or Lung-Qi deficiency.
585
FIG. 25.2
 
Swelling in the chest/breast area
A swelling of the tip of the tongue (
Fig. 25.3
 
), usually associated
with a Red colour, is very common and it indicates Heart-Heat or
Heart-Fire deriving from severe emotional problems.
FIG. 25.3
 
Swelling of the tip of the tongue
A swelling of the front third of the tongue (
Fig. 25.4
 
) indicates
retention of Phlegm in the Lungs. (See 
Plate 25.2 on p. P23
 
.)
FIG. 25.4
 
Swelling of the front third of the tongue
586
STIFF
A Stiff tongue lacks the normal suppleness and flexibility. It looks
hard and stiff. It indicates internal Wind, Blood stasis or severe Yin
deficiency. (See 
Plate 25.3 on p. P24
 
.)
FLACCID
A flaccid tongue is flabby and, in severe cases, it has a crumpled
look. It always indicates lack of Body Fluids or Blood.
LONG
A Long tongue is rather narrow and, when extended, protrudes
further than normal. Not commonly seen, it always indicates Heat.
SHORT
A Short tongue appears to be contracted and the patient is unable
to extend it out of the mouth cavity. The significance of the Short
tongue depends on the body colour because it can indicate two
opposite conditions: if it is Pale it indicates severe internal Cold
and Yang deficiency; while if it is Red and without coating it
indicates severe Yin deficiency. In the first instance, the patient
cannot extend the tongue enough because internal Cold contracts
the muscles, while in the latter instance this happens because
there are not enough fluids in the tongue.
CRACKED
Generally, cracks on the surface of the tongue indicate Yin
deficiency or the tendency to it but, though this is the most
common cause, there are others such as Dampness or deficiency of
the Original Qi. Horizontal cracks (
Fig. 25.5
 
) indicate Yin
deficiency, usually of the Stomach or Kidneys, or both, and they are
more commonly seen in the elderly.
587
FIG. 25.5
 
Horizontal cracks
Irregular cracks (
Fig. 25.6
 
) usually indicate Stomach-Yin
deficiency or the tendency to it. (See 
Plate 25.4 on p. P24
 
.)
FIG. 25.6
 
Irregular cracks
A central short crack in the midline of the tongue (
Fig. 25.7
 
) is
very common and it indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency, or the
tendency to it. (See 
Plate 25.5 on p. P24
 
.)
FIG. 25.7
 
Stomach crack
A central long crack in the midline of the tongue (
Fig. 25.8
 
) is
588
also common and its clinical significance depends on its depth and
on the colour of the tongue body, especially the tip. (See 
Plates 25.6
and 
25.7 on p. P24
 
.)
FIG. 25.8
 
Heart crack
If the Heart crack is shallow and the body colour normal, this
simply indicates a constitutional tendency to Heart patterns and it
does not have a specific clinical significance. However, if a person
has such a crack, any emotional stress from which he or she might
suffer will have deeper repercussions than for someone without a
Heart crack. According to Dr J. H. F. Shen, a shallow Heart crack on
a normal body colour may also 
indicate heart disease in the
parents or even grandparents.
If the Heart crack is deep, it indicates that the person may suffer
from a Heart pattern due to emotional stress, all the more so if the
tip is also Red. One could describe different situations of
emotional stress in order of increasing severity as manifested on
the tongue as follows:
 
• 
 
shallow Heart crack, normal body colour
• 
 
no Heart crack, Red tip
• 
 
deep Heart crack, normal body colour
• 
 
shallow Heart crack, Red tip
• 
 
deep Heart crack, Red tip
• 
 
deep Heart crack, Red tip with red points
• 
 
deep Heart crack, Red tongue with redder tip and red
points
• 
 
deep Heart crack, Red tongue with redder and
swollen tip and red points.
589
Short, transverse cracks on the sides (
Fig. 25.9
 
) are a clear sign
of Spleen-Yin deficiency. This is not common and is not a common
condition often described among the Spleen patterns; such cracks
are the easiest way of identifying such a pattern (see 
Plate 25.5 on
p. P24
 
.)
FIG. 25.9
 
Transverse Spleen cracks
Short, transverse cracks behind the tip in the Lung area (
Fig.
25.10
 
) usually indicate a past Lung pathology such as pneumonia,
whooping cough or repeatedlung infections during childhood. As
such cracks reflect past pathologies, they do not have a major
clinical significance.
FIG. 25.10
 
Lung cracks
An extremely deep midline crack with other small cracks
branching out from it (
Fig. 25.11
 
) is usually seen in a Red tongue
without coating. It indicates a severe Kidney-Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat in the Kidneys and Heart.
590
FIG. 25.11
 
Deep midline cracks with small cracks
DEVIATED
The Deviated tongue deviates to one side when extended (
Fig.
25.12
 
).
FIG. 25.12
 
Deviated tongue
The most common clinical significance of a Deviated tongue is
internal Wind and this type of tongue is most commonly seen in
the elderly. In a young person it may be related to a Heart
deficiency.
MOVING
The Moving tongue moves 
slowly
 
from side to side with large-
amplitude movements when it is extended and the patient cannot
control its movement. It always indicates internal Wind and is
usually seen in the elderly.
591
QUIVERING
The Quivering tongue trembles 
rapidly
 
and with small-amplitude
movements as it is extended. The most common clinical
significance of a Quivering tongue in chronic conditions is Spleen-
Qi or Spleen-Yang deficiency.
TOOTHMARKED
The tongue with teethmarks (
Fig. 25.13
 
) indicates chronic Spleen-
Qi deficiency, but since a tongue with a normal body shape can
have teethmarks, do not assume that the presence of teethmarks
necess-arily means it is Swollen. (See 
Plate 25.8 on p. P24
 
.)
FIG. 25.13
 
Tongue with teethmarks
Box 25.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying different tongue-
body shapes.
 
BOX 25.1
 
   
 
TONGUE-BODY SHAPE
• 
 
Thin: Blood deficiency (if Pale); Yin deficiency (if
without coating)
• 
 
Swollen: Phlegm or Dampness
– 
 
Swollen sides all along edge (and Red):
Liver-Heat
– 
 
Swollen sides in central section (and
Pale): chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency
– 
 
Swollen on the sides in chest-breast area:
Phlegm in chest or breast
592
– 
 
Swollen tip (and Red): Heart-Fire
– 
 
Swelling of front third: Phlegm in Lungs
• 
 
Stiff: internal Wind, Blood stasis, severe Yin
deficiency
• 
 
Flaccid: lack of Body Fluids, Blood deficiency
• 
 
Long: Heat
• 
 
Short: severe Yang deficiency (if wet); severe Yin
deficiency (if peeled and Red)
• 
 
Cracked: Yin deficiency
– 
 
central long, thin midline crack:
constitutional Heart deficiency with
tendency to emotional problems
– 
 
central, short, wide crack in the centre:
constitutional Stomach deficiency
– 
 
short, transverse cracks on the sides:
Spleen-Yin deficiency
– 
 
short, diagonal crack in Lung area: past
Lung disease
– 
 
very deep, midline crack with other
cracks stemming from it: Kidney-Yin
deficiency
• 
 
Deviated: Liver-Wind, or Heart deficiency (in young
person)
• 
 
Moving: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Quivering: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Teethmarks: Spleen-Qi deficiency
593
CHAPTER 26
 
TONGUE
COATING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
PHYSIOLOGY OF TONGUE COATING
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF TONGUE COATING
PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF COATING
COATING WITH OR WITHOUT ROOT
COATING THICKNESS
COATING DISTRIBUTION
COATING MOISTURE
COATING TEXTURE
Sticky coating
Slippery coating
Mouldy coating
TONGUE COATING IN EXTERNAL DISEASES
PHYSIOLOGY OF TONGUE COATING
The Stomach rots and ripens food, and during the process of
594
digestion a small amount of what the ancient Chinese books called
“turbidity” or “turbid fluids” escapes upwards to reach the
tongue: this forms a coating. Therefore the presence of a coating
indicates the normal functioning of Stomach-Qi. A normal coating
should be white and thin enough to see the body colour through it.
Although the tongue coating reflects primarily the physiological
activity of the Stomach, the Spleen and the Kidneys also play a role
in its formation; for this reason, if a tongue lacks a coating this
may indicate Stomach-Yin or Kidney-Yin deficiency, or both.
It should be noted that the tongue coating is naturally thicker at
the root of the tongue and thinnest towards the tip, and that the
coating does not extend to the very edges of the tongue.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF TONGUE
COATING
The tongue coating reflects primarily the state of the Yang organs
and especially of the Stomach. It also reflects conditions of
Deficiency or Excess and of Heat or Cold (
Box 26.1
 
).
 
BOX 26.1
 
   
 
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
OF TONGUE COATING
• 
 
Yang organs
• 
 
Deficiency-Excess
• 
 
Heat-Cold
Observation of the tongue coating needs to be based on a careful
analysis of the history of the patient because the tongue coating
changes very rapidly in acute conditions and can reflect short-term
variations. For example, a yellow tongue coating in the centre
indicates Stomach-Heat and this could equally be a chronic
condition of Stomach-Heat or simply an acute stomach upset. We
therefore need to enquire carefully to exclude the possibility that
the yellow coating 
merely reflects an acute but passing condition.
Apart from the history, the brightness of the coating can give us an
595
indication of its duration: the duller the coating, the more chronic
is the condition.
As the coating reflects primarily the condition of the Yang
organs, its thickness and particularly its distribution give a clear
indication of a pathology affecting one of the Yang organs. For
example, the sides of the tongue reflect the condition of the Liver
and Gall-Bladder and we can differentiate between these two by
referring to the body colour or coating, that is, if the body colour is
affected it indicates a Liver pathology, whereas if the coating is
affected it indicates a Gall-Bladder pathology. Similarly for the root
of the tongue: if the root of the tongue is Red without coating this
indicates Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, whereas if it has
a thick coating it indicates a pathology of one of the Yang organs of
the Lower Burner (Bladder or Intestines).
The tongue coating also gives us a good indication of Deficiency
and Excess conditions because a thick coating with root always
reflects a Full condition while a coating without root or the
complete absence of coating always reflects a Deficiency condition.
This will be described in more detail below.
The tongue coating gives also a very clear indication of the Hot
or Cold nature of a condition but, as indicated above, it may
merely reflect a passing, acute condition.
Box 26.1
 
summarizes the significance of a tongue coating.
PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF
COATING
The presence or absence of coating tells us primarily about the
state of the Stomach-Qi. If the tongue has a coating with root, it
indicates that the Stomach-Qi is still intact even if the excessive
thickness or colour of the coating is pathological. Excluding the
case of a normal, thin white coating, the tongue with coating
usually indicates a Full condition precisely because the Stomach-
Qi is intact. A tongue without coating indicates that the Stomach-
Qi is severely weakened and therefore a Deficiency condition.
Therefore, it is better to have a thick, pathological coating with
root than not to have a coating.
596
How does the coating disappear from the tongue surface? In
chronic conditions, the tongue coating disappears gradually over a
long time (usually years); in acute conditions, and especially acute,
febrile diseases in children, the coating may disappear very quickly
in a matter of days.
In chronic conditions characterized by the absence of coating,
with treatment the coating should return gradually and quite
slowly; this is a positive sign. If the coating appears suddenly on a
tongue that previously lacked it, this is a bad sign; for example, in
a patient with cancer the sudden return of coating to a particular
area of the tongue may indicate a metastasis of the corresponding
organ.
Conversely, if a tongue has a very thick, pathological coating, its
sudden total or partial disappearance in the course of a disease is a
poor prognostic sign because it indicates the sudden depletion of
Stomach-Qi. However, the clinical significance is different if a thick
tongue coating becomes normal as a result of treatment; as
indicated above, the tongue coating can change much more
quickly than the tongue-body colour.
COATING WITH OR WITHOUT ROOT
We can compare the tongue coating to grass: it should “grow” out
of the tongue body just as grass grows out of the soil and it should
have “roots” just as grass stems have roots in the earth. A coating
with root reflects the normal functioning of Stomach-Qi even if the
coating may be pathological (e.g. too thick and dark yellow). A
coating without root resembles mown grass scattered on barren
ground: it looks as if it has been “added” on top of the tongue
rather than growing out of it. (See 
Plates 26.1a and b on p. P25
 
.) In
severe conditions, the rootless coating may look like salt or snow
sprinkled on top of the tongue. A rootless coating indicates the
beginning of the weakening of Stomach-Qi in the course of a
chronic disease. Therefore, it is better to have a thick, pathological
coating with root than to have a thin coating without root.
It should be emphasized that the coating with root is not
necessarily thin, although that is the most common situation. The
coating without root can also 
be thick and often sticky: this
597
represents the worst scenario because it indicates that, on the one
hand, Stomach-Qi is weakened and, on the other, that there is a
significant pathogenic factor (against which the body is unable to
fight due to the Stomach-Qi deficiency) (
Fig. 26.1
 
). For this reason
it is obviously better to have a thin rather than a thick coating
without root. (See 
Plate 26.1c on p. P25
 
.)
FIG. 26.1
 
Clinical significance of coating with or without root
according to thickness
Box 26.2
 
summarizes the four different situations seen in coating
with and without root.
 
BOX 26.2
 
   
 
COATING WITH OR
WITHOUT ROOT
• 
 
Thin coating with root: healthy Stomach-Qi
• 
 
Thick coating with root: strong pathogenic factor,
Stomach-Qi still intact
• 
 
Thin coating without root: beginning of weakening of
Stomach-Qi
• 
 
Thick coating without root: strong pathogenic factor,
Stomach-Qi weakened
COATING THICKNESS
The normal coating is thin and it should be possible to see the
tongue body through it. If the tongue body cannot be seen, the
tongue coating is too thick. The thickness of the tongue coating
reflects the strength of the pathogenic factor clearly and
598
accurately: the thicker the coating the stronger the pathogenic
factor. If a thin coating becomes thick, this indicates that the
pathogenic factors are getting stronger or that they are penetrating
deeper into the Interior. The latter situation applies to conditions
of acute, external diseases, which will be explained in greater detail
below. Therefore, if we are treating a patient with a thick tongue
coating, we should expect it to become gradually thinner. In some
cases, a thick tongue coating can revert back to normal even after a
very short time.
As mentioned above, a thick coating may be with or without
root but the clinical significance of its thickness is the same - that
is, it reflects the strength of a pathogenic factor.
COATING DISTRIBUTION
Generally speaking, the same areas that reflect changes in the
tongue-body colour also reflect changes in the tongue coating, but
there are some differences. For example, the tongue coating never
extends to the very tip or the very edges of the tongue.
The most common locations where a thick coating is observed
are in the centre and on the root of the tongue. A thick coating in
the centre reflects the presence of a pathogenic factor in the
Stomach, which may be Cold, Heat, Dampness or Phlegm
depending on the colour and consistency of the coating, whereas a
thick coating on the root reflects the presence of a pathogenic
factor in the Bladder or Intestines.
A pathogenic factor in the Gall-Bladder (
Fig. 26.2
 
) may be
manifested in a variety of ways; the most common one is a bilateral
or unilateral coating that comes forward in one or two strips on the
edges. (See 
Plate 26.2 on p. P25
 
.)
599
FIG. 26.2
 
Coating in the Gall-Bladder area
COATING MOISTURE
The normal coating should be relatively moist, indicating a good
supply and movement of Body Fluids. If the coating is too dry, it
indicates either Heat or Yin deficiency. If the coating is too wet, it
indicates severe Yang deficiency.
COATING TEXTURE
The normal coating texture should be like the hairs of a very fine
brush, in Western medicine corresponding to the filiform papillae.
The individual “hairs” (filiform papillae) should be clearly seen
and they should not be too dry or too wet. Pathological textures of
the coating make it sticky, slippery or mouldy.
Sticky Coating
The sticky (also called greasy) coating has an oily but coarse
appearance and the individual papillae can still be seen. (See 
Plate
26.3 on p. P25
 
.) To visualize a sticky coating, one can use the
analogy of a toothbrush of very fine, natural hair spread with
butter or lard: the toothbrush will appear very greasy but the
individual hairs can still be seen. Thus, although the sticky coating
is greasy and oily, it may also be, in addition, dry. This may seem a
contradiction but it is not. To use the same analogy, we can think of
a toothbrush with very fine hairs which has been spread with
butter and left for several days; after that time, it will still have a
greasy appearance but it will be dry. Thus, we should not identify
600
“stickiness” of the tongue coating with wetness.
The sticky coating indicates either Dampness or Phlegm and
especially the latter. The sticky coating is extremely common: in
my practice out of a database of 2378 patients nearly 30% have
such a coating.
Slippery Coating
The slippery coating has a greasy look. It is characterized by the
fact that the individual papillae cannot be easily distinguished as
they seem to be covered by an oily fluid. To compare the slippery
with the sticky coating, the former is oilier and the individual
papillae cannot be distinguished, whereas the latter is coarser and
the individual papillae can be distinguished. The slippery coating,
like the sticky coating, also indicates Dampness or Phlegm but
predominantly Dampness.
Mouldy Coating
The mouldy coating looks thick, patchy and crumbly. Chinese
books describe it as “tofu”; to use a Western analogy, it could be
described as “cottage cheese”. The mouldy coating also looks
greasy and is by definition without root.
The mouldy coating indicates also Dampness or Phlegm but
against a background of Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Empty-Heat plays a role in the formation of the Phlegm indicated
by the mouldy coating in evaporating the fluids. The mouldy
coating is seen only in the elderly.
Box 26.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying different coating
textures.
 
BOX 26.3
 
   
 
COATING TEXTURE
• 
 
Sticky coating: Dampness or Phlegm (especially
latter)
• 
 
Slippery coating: Dampness or Phlegm (especially the
former)
• 
 
Mouldy coating: Dampness or Phlegm with Stomach-
Yin deficiency
601
TONGUE COATING IN EXTERNAL
DISEASES
In external diseases from invasion of Wind, the interpretation of
the tongue coating is quite different from that of internal diseases.
In external diseases the thickness of the coating reflects, not
only the intensity of the pathogenic factor, but also its progression
towards the Interior: thus, if in the course of an acute external
disease, the coating becomes thicker it indicates that not only has
the pathogenic factor become stronger but that it is beginning to
penetrate into the Interior.
The coating in external diseases reflects Hot and Cold influences
in the same way as in internal diseases, but there are differences.
The most important difference is that the coating tends to be white
in the very beginning stages of an invasion of Wind even if it is
Wind-Heat. If during an acute external disease the coating turns
from white to yellow, this means there is not only a change from
Cold to Heat (although a white coating may appear also in Wind-
Heat), but also a penetration of the pathogenic factor into the
Interior.
The distribution of the coating also reflects the stages of
penetration of an external pathogenic fac-tor. In the very beginning
stages of an invasion of external Wind, the coating may be more
concentrated 
on the front third or on the sides. In this context,
these two areas correspond to the Exterior of the body while the
centre of the tongue corresponds to the Interior. (See 
Fig. 24.8 on
p. 212
 
)
Thus, if after a few days the coating from these two areas
extends towards the centre of the tongue, it indicates that a
pathogenic factor is penetrating into the Interior.
602
CHAPTER 27
 
TONGUE
IMAGES AND
PATTERNS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
QI-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
YANG-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
BLOOD-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
YIN-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
THE TONGUE IN PHLEGM AND DAMPNESS
THE TONGUE IN HEAT
THE TONGUE IN COLD
THE TONGUE IN QI AND BLOOD STAGNATION
THE TONGUE IN INTERNAL WIND
THE TONGUE IN EXTERNAL INVASIONS OF WIND
QI-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
The tongue-body colour reflects primarily the condition of Blood
603
rather than Qi and therefore a mild deficiency of Qi may not
manifest on the tongue at all. In long-standing cases of Qi
deficiency the tongue may become slightly Pale.
Severe Spleen-Qi deficiency may manifest with a swelling on the
sides of the tongue in the central section (
Fig. 27.1
 
). (See also 
Plate
27.1 on p. P25
 
.) This swelling differs from a Liver swelling in that
it is much wider and it is more in the central section of the tongue
(Middle Burner).
FIG. 27.1
 
Swelling on the sides from Spleen-Qi deficiency
Stomach-Qi deficiency manifests with a rootless coating or with
lack of coating in the centre (with the tongue-body colour still
normal).
YANG-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
In Yang deficiency the tongue is definitely Pale and it tends also to
be slightly wet. In severe Yang deficiency, the tongue may also
become Swollen but the swelling itself is due to the presence of
Dampness or Phlegm rather than the Yang deficiency itself.
 
A Swollen tongue does not indicate Yang deficiency but
rather Dampness or Phlegm.
When the tongue is Pale, one cannot generally identify which is
the main organ involved. For example, the tongue’s Paleness may
be due to Spleen-Yang deficiency, Kidney-Yang deficiency, or both,
604
and we cannot deduce from the tongue alone which is the case.
The only guideline one can follow is that the more Pale and
Swollen the tongue is, the more likely it is that the cause is Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
BLOOD-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
In Blood deficiency the tongue is also Pale but tending to be
slightly dry. In severe cases of Blood deficiency, the tongue should
be Thin as well as Pale but, for the reasons explained above, this is
seldom the case.
Liver-Blood deficiency is frequently indicated by a Pale colour on
the sides in the Liver area. Although the tip corresponds to the
Heart, the tip is never Pale on its own in Heart-Blood deficiency; in
this condition, however, the tongue may become Pale in the chest
area (see 
Fig. 23.8 p. 205
 
).
YIN-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
The tongue coating is formed during the process of the Stomach’s
digestion of food and, as we have seen above, the normal tongue
should have a thin, white coating, which indicates a good state of
Stomach-Qi. The normal coating is formed by the “turbid fluids”
produced by the Stomach’s process of digestion and is therefore an
expression of the normal state of Stomach fluids and therefore Qi
and Yin.
If Stomach-Qi is weakened, the very first sign of this on the
tongue will be a rootless coating in the centre; if Stomach-Qi gets
weaker the coating will be rootless all over the tongue and if
Stomach-Qi deficiency progresses to Stomach-Yin deficiency the
tongue will lack a coating entirely. As the Stomach is the origin of
fluids, a tongue without coating always indicates a deficiency of
Stomach-Yin. Of course, a tongue without coating is also seen in
deficiency of Yin of other organs but, whichever other organ is
involved, it always indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency. For example,
the tongue may lack a coating in the front indicating Lung-Yin
deficiency but, because the coating is a reflection of Stomach-Qi
and Stomach-Yin, we can say that in this case there is a deficiency
605
of Yin of both the Lungs and Stomach. In terms of treatment this
means that, whenever we see a tongue without coating, Stomach-
Yin should always be nourished whatever other organ is involved.
It is most important to stress that Yin deficiency on the tongue
is manifested by the lack of coating and 
not
 
by the redness of the
tongue body. Thus, if a tongue has a normal body colour and lacks
coating we can say that it indicates Yin deficiency, whereas if it is
Red and lacks a coating it indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat. Therefore, the lack of coating by itself indicates Yin
deficiency, whereas the lack of coating associated with the redness
of the tongue body indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat. In
other words, although Empty-Heat arises from Yin deficiency,
eventually, especially in the beginning stages, Yin deficiency may
and does occur frequently without Empty-Heat, in which case the
tongue lacks a coating but is not Red.
 
Remember
 
: Yin deficiency is manifested by the lack of
coating, not by the redness of the tongue, i.e.:
• 
 
lack of coating: Yin deficiency
• 
 
lack of coating and redness: Yin deficiency and
Empty-Heat.
We can look upon Stomach-Yin deficiency as the beginning of a
Yin deficiency that will eventually affect other organs. However,
this does not mean that a Yin deficiency is always indicated by
Stomach-Yin deficiency. For example, it is quite possible for
someone to suffer from Lung-Yin deficiency without Stomach-Yin
deficiency manifesting on the tongue coating. However, if the Yin
deficiency manifests with a lack of coating, we can say that there is
some underlying Stomach-Yin deficiency.
We can identify several stages of Yin deficiency according to the
tongue coating and the body colour. As far as the Stomach is
concerned, Stomach-Qi deficiency usually precedes Stomach-Yin
deficiency and the very first and lightest sign of Stomach-Qi
deficiency would be a rootless coating in the centre. At the other
end of the scale, the most severe type of Yin deficiency (by this
time with Empty-Heat) would be a 
tongue that is Red, completely
606
without coating and possibly with cracks indicating both Stomach-
Yin and Kidney-Yin deficiency. We can therefore say that the
tongue coating or the absence of it reflects a progression from Qi
deficiency to Yin deficiency usually starting with the Stomach and
gradually affecting other organs.
The most common stages of this process that we can identify are
as follows:
 
• 
 
Normal tongue with thin-white coating with root
 
:
indicates good Stomach-Qi.
• 
 
Rootless coating in the centre, normal body colour
 
:
indicates the beginning of Stomach-Qi deficiency (
Fig.
27.2
 
).
FIG. 27.2
 
Tongue with rootless coating in the centre
• 
 
Rootless coating all over, normal body colour
 
:
indicates Stomach-Qi deficiency (
Fig. 27.3
 
and 
Plates
26.1.a b on p. P25
 
).
FIG. 27.3
 
Tongue with rootless coating all over
607
• 
 
Rootless coating all over but missing in the centre,
normal body colour
 
: indicates the beginning of
Stomach-Yin deficiency (
Fig. 27.4
 
). A variation of this
tongue would be that the centre is Red, which indicates
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat (not affecting
other organs) (
Fig. 27.5
 
).
FIG. 27.4
 
Tongue with rootless coating all over but
missing in the centre
FIG. 27.5
 
Tongue with rootless coating all over, missing
in the centre and Red in the centre
• 
 
Coating missing all over, normal body colour
 
:
indicates advanced Stomach-Yin deficiency. A variation
of this tongue would be that the centre is Red, which
indicates advanced Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat (not affecting other organs).
• 
 
Coating missing all over, Red body colour
 
: indicates
advanced Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat of the
Stomach and other organs, notably the Kidneys. A
608
variation of this tongue would be that, in addition to the
above signs, the tongue also has a deep, midline
Stomach crack and other scattered cracks, which simply
indicate a more severe condition of Yin deficiency of the
Stomach and Kidneys (
Fig. 27.6
 
).
FIG. 27.6
 
Tongue with no coating, Red body colour,
deep, midline Stomach crack and other scattered
Stomach cracks
Any of the first five tongues indicated above could also have a
central Stomach crack or scattered Stomach cracks (
Figs 27.2
 
–
27.5
), which would simply indicate a pre-existing tendency to Stomach-
Yin deficiency.
 
BOX 27.1
 
   
 
DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Qi deficiency
• 
 
General Qi deficiency: slightly Pale
• 
 
Spleen-Qi deficiency: teethmarks or swollen on sides
in central section
• 
 
Stomach-Qi deficiency: rootless coating
• 
 
Yang deficiency: Pale and slightly wet
Blood deficiency
• 
 
General Blood deficiency: Pale and slightly dry
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: Pale on the sides
609
Yin deficiency
• 
 
General Yin deficiency: lack of coating
• 
 
Stomach-Yin deficiency: lack of coating in the centre
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency: lack of coating in the front third
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: lack of coating all over, Red
body
THE TONGUE IN PHLEGM AND
DAMPNESS
Both Phlegm and Dampness may manifest with a Swollen tongue
and a sticky coating. However, in the case of Phlegm the swelling
of the tongue is predominant, whereas in the case of Dampness
the coating is predominant. Although both Phlegm and Dampness
may derive from Qi deficiency, Qi deficiency on its own does 
not
cause the tongue to be Swollen; therefore a Swollen tongue
indicates not Qi deficiency but rather the presence of a pathogenic
factor, that is, Phlegm or Dampness.
The tongue coating will differ slightly depending on whether
there is Dampness or Phlegm present. Dampness causes the
coating to appear more slippery and smooth, whereas a coating
indicating Phlegm tends to be slightly rough and sticky.
THE TONGUE IN HEAT
Heat always manifests with a Red body colour and when
examining a Red tongue the first question I ask myself is whether
the tongue has a coating or not: a Red tongue with a coating with
root (whatever its colour) indicates Full-Heat whereas a Red
tongue without coating (or with a rootless coating) indicates
Empty-Heat.
 
• 
 
Full-Heat
 
: Red tongue with coating
• 
 
Empty-Heat
 
: Red tongue without coating
610
When observing a Red tongue indicating Heat, we should
identify the level of the Heat in accordance with the identification
of patterns according to the Four Levels. Although the theory of
the Four Levels was developed to explain the symptoms and signs
of acute febrile diseases, it can be applied to conditions of chronic
Heat. Indeed, much of the knowledge regarding Red tongues and
red points derives from the theory of the Four Levels.
At the Defensive-Qi level, the tongue may be Red or slightly Red
on the front or sides, or both, in the areas corresponding to the
Exterior in the context of invasions of external Wind. (See 
Fig. 23.4
on p. 205
 
.)
At the Qi level, the tongue is Red with a yellow, dark yellow,
brown or even black coating. However, within the Qi level one can
distinguish the two conditions of Heat or Fire. Heat is more
superficial than Fire and can be cleared with pungent-cold herbs.
Fire is deeper than Heat and needs to be drained with bitter-cold
herbs. Within the theory of the Six Stages, the Bright-Yang channel
pattern corresponds to Heat (of the Stomach) and the Bright-Yang
organ pattern corresponds to Fire. Within the theory of the Four
Levels the pattern of Stomach-Heat corresponds to Heat, whereas
that of Dry Heat in the Stomach and Intestines corresponds to
Fire. The tongue corresponding to Heat is Red with a yellow
coating, whereas that corresponding to Fire is darker Red and with
a dry, dark-yellow, brown or even black coating.
At the Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels, the tongue is Red and dry
without a coating because at these levels the Fire has injured Yin.
Box 27.2
 
summarizes the tongue signs according to the Four
Levels.
 
BOX 27.2
 
   
 
THE FOUR LEVELS AND THE
TONGUE
• 
 
Slightly Red on the sides/front: Defensive-Qi level
• 
 
Red with dark-yellow coating: Qi level
• 
 
Red without coating: Nutritive-Qi level
• 
 
Dark Red without coating, dry: Blood level
611
THE TONGUE IN COLD
Cold affecting a Yin organ will manifest primarily on the tongue-
body colour, which becomes Pale. For example, Spleen-Yang
deficiency commonly manifests with a Pale tongue. Cold affecting
a Yang organ will 
manifest primarily on the tongue coating. For
example, Cold in the Stomach manifests with a white coating in
the centre.
When assessing the tongue in Cold patterns, we must
distinguish Full- from Empty-Cold. Full-Cold manifests primarily
on the coating, which becomes thick and white, while Empty-Cold
manifests primarily on the colour and moisture of the tongue
body, which becomes Pale and slightly wet.
THE TONGUE IN QI AND BLOOD
STAGNATION
The tongue-body colour reflects the condition of Blood more than
that of Qi. Therefore, in conditions of Qi stagnation the tongue-
body colour may be unchanged, whereas in Blood stasis the
tongue-body colour will become Purple. Chinese books frequently
state that Liver-Qi stagnation manifests with a Purple tongue but I
disagree with this as, in my opinion, a Purple colour on the sides
always indicates Blood stasis.
In severe and long-standing conditions of Liver-Qi stagnation,
the sides in the Liver area may become Red. However, in this case
too, we can say that the tongue-body colour may reflect the
condition of Blood primarily because the redness of the sides of
the tongue indicates that long-standing Qi stagnation has given
rise to Heat. Thus, the redness on the sides reflects the Heat rather
than the Qi stagnation.
Blood stasis may manifest also with a Purple and dark colour of
the sublingual veins. As mentioned above, this normally reflects
the early stages of Blood stasis, particularly when it occurs in the
Middle and Upper Burners.
612
THE TONGUE IN INTERNAL WIND
In internal Wind, the tongue may be Stiff, Moving or Deviated.
Stiff is probably the most common way in which internal Wind
manifests; the Moving tongue is not frequently seen, while the
Deviated tongue indicating internal Wind is usually seen only in
patients suffering from Wind-stroke.
THE TONGUE IN EXTERNAL
INVASIONS OF WIND
As far as the body colour is concerned, in external invasions of
Wind-Cold the tongue-body colour does not change. In invasions
of Wind-Heat the tongue-body colour may become Red in the front
or sides, or both, and, especially in children, it may also have red
points in these areas. As far as the coating is concerned, this
reflects invasions of external Wind only when the pathogenic
factor is particularly strong, in which case the coating becomes
thick. In the very beginning stages of invasion of Wind, the coating
is white even with Wind-Heat; in other words, in the context of
external invasions of Wind, a white colour of the coating indicates
the early stage of invasion whereas a yellow colour indicates a later
stage.
613
PART 2
DIAGNOSIS BY
INTERROGATION
614
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
INTERROGATION
Part contents
28. 
 
Introduction
29. 
 
Pain
30. 
 
Food and taste
31. 
 
Stools and urine
32. 
 
Thirst and drink
33. 
 
Energy levels
34. 
 
Head
35. 
 
Face
36. 
 
Throat and neck
37. 
 
Body
38. 
 
Chest and abdomen
39. 
 
Limbs
40. 
 
Sleep
41. 
 
Sweating
42. 
 
Ears and eyes
43. 
 
Feeling of cold, feeling of heat and fever
44. 
 
Mental–emotional symptoms
45. 
 
Sexual symptoms
46. 
 
Women’s symptoms
47. 
 
Children’s symptoms
48. 
 
Diagnosing the causes of disease
615
INTRODUCTION
This part deals with the diagnostic method based on asking. This
is the central art of diagnosis not only because we need to elicit
information from the patient but also because the 
way
 
the patient
talks during the interrogation is in itself a very important
diagnostic sign reflecting the underlying physical, emotional and
mental condition of the patient. Moreover, it is through the
interrogation process that we interact with the patient; therefore,
the skill, tact and compassion with which we conduct the
interrogation has a profound influence on the therapeutic results
themselves. Thus, the process of ‘interrogation’ of the patient is far
more than a set of rules about which questions to ask and how to
ask them: it is the heart of the therapeutic encounter between the
practitioner and the patient; it is the crucible in which the healing
takes place.
Diagnosis by interrogation is one of the four pillars of the
Chinese diagnostic methods and one that should always be carried
out. If the patient is unconscious or is a baby or a small child, the
questions should be put to a close relative.
The discussion of the interrogation procedure will be articulated
under the following headings (
Chapter 28
 
):
 
• 
 
nature of diagnosis by interrogation
• 
 
nature of ‘symptoms’ in Chinese medicine
• 
 
the art of interrogation: asking the right questions
• 
 
terminology problems in interrogation
• 
 
patients’ expressions
• 
 
pitfalls to avoid in interrogation
 
• 
 
procedure for interrogation
• 
 
time scale of symptoms
• 
 
integration of interrogation with observation
• 
 
identification of patterns and interrogation
• 
 
tongue and pulse diagnosis: integration with
interrogation
• 
 
the 10 traditional questions
616
• 
 
the 16 questions.
617
CHAPTER 28
 
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER CONTENTS
NATURE OF DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
NATURE OF “SYMPTOMS” IN CHINESE MEDICINE
Tongue and pulse
THE ART OF INTERROGATION: ASKING THE RIGHT
QUESTIONS
TERMINOLOGY PROBLEMS IN INTERROGATION
PATIENT’S EXPRESSIONS
PITFALLS TO AVOID IN INTERROGATION
PROCEDURE FOR INTERROGATION
TIME SCALE OF SYMPTOMS
INTEGRATION OF INTERROGATION WITH OBSERVATION
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS AND INTERROGATION
TONGUE AND PULSE DIAGNOSIS: INTEGRATION WITH
INTERROGATION
THE 10 TRADITIONAL QUESTIONS
Limitations of the 10 traditional questions
Questions on emotional state
Questions about sexual life
Questions on energy levels
618
THE 16 QUESTIONS
NATURE OF DIAGNOSIS BY
INTERROGATION
We can distinguish two aspects to the interrogation: a general one
and a specific one.
In a 
general
 
sense, the interrogation is the talk between doctor
and patient to find out how the presenting problem arose, the
living and working conditions of the patient and the emotional
and family environment. The aim of an investigation of these
aspects of the patient’s life is ultimately to find the cause or causes
of the disease rather than to identify the pattern; finding the
causes of the disease is important in order for the patient and
doctor to work together to try to eliminate or minimize such
causes (
Fig. 28.1
 
). How to find the cause of disease is discussed in
Chapter 48
 
.
FIG. 28.1
 
Interrogation
In a 
specific
 
sense, the interrogation aims at identifying the
prevailing pattern of disharmony in the light of whatever method
of pattern identification is applicable, for example according to the
Internal Organs, according to the channels, according to the Four
Levels, etc.
Box 28.1
 
summarizes these aspects of interrogation.
 
BOX 28.1
 
   
 
THE TWO ASPECTS OF
619
INTERROGATION
• 
 
General
 
: asking about lifestyle, work, emotions, diet,
etc. to determine the cause of disease
• 
 
Specific
 
: asking about clinical manifestations to
determine the patterns of disharmony
It is important not to blur the distinction between these two
aspects of interrogation; enquiring about the 
patient’s family
situation, environment, work and relationships gives us an idea of
the 
cause
 
, not the 
pattern
 
of the disharmony. Knowing that a
patient is a business man with a heavy work burden, an
antagonistic relationship with his employers or marital problems
does not tell us which might be the prevailing 
pattern
 
of
disharmony but simply that stress and emotional tension are likely
to be the 
cause
 
of the disharmony; this knowledge is essential
when working with the patient to try to eliminate or minimize the
causes of disease.
During the course of the interrogation, we ask about many
symptoms that may be apparently unrelated to the presenting
problem; we do this in order to find the pattern (or patterns) of
disharmony that underlie the presenting problem. For example, a
patient may present with chronic backache which we suspect may
be due to a Kidney-Yang deficiency with Dampness. By asking
about bowels and urination, for example, we may find that there
are other symptoms of Dampness in one of these two systems and
this would confirm the original diagnosis of Dampness as the
cause of the backache.
Not all symptoms and signs add up to one pattern of
disharmony: indeed, most patients will suffer from at least two
related
 
patterns of disharmony. To use the above example again, in
this case enquiring about urination and defecation may confirm to
us that this patient does indeed suffer from Kidney-Yang
deficiency with Dampness. These two patterns are related because
deficient Kidney-Yang fails to warm, move, transform and excrete
fluids properly, which may accumulate in the form of Dampness.
Moreover, an enquiry about other areas of questioning beyond the
620
lower back and urination is always important because it may reveal
other patterns of disharmony, which may be 
unrelated
 
to the
patterns of disharmony causing a patient’s presenting symptoms.
To continue the above example, it may be that an enquiry about
bowels, urination and other systems reveals a condition of Qi
stagnation, which may be unrelated to the presenting problem.
Diagnosis by interrogation is intimately related to pattern
identification: one cannot be carried out without a thorough
knowledge of the other. Without a knowledge of pattern
identification, interrogation would be a meaningless and aimless
process of asking questions without a clear idea of what to make of
the answers and how to use these to arrive at a diagnosis. On the
other hand, a knowledge of pattern identification without a
thorough understanding of diagnostic methods would be useless
as we would lack the skills and tools to arrive at a pattern
identification. Thus, a knowledge of pattern identification is the
essential prerequisite to form a diagnosis, but skill in the
diagnostic art is the means by which a diagnosis is made.
 
Remember
 
: the questions asked during the
interrogation must always be guided by our attempt to
confirm or exclude a pattern of disharmony.
NATURE OF “SYMPTOMS” IN
CHINESE MEDICINE
Diagnosis by interrogation is based on the fundamental principle
that symptoms and signs reflect the condition of the Internal
Organs and channels. The concept of symptoms and signs in
Chinese medicine is broader than in Western medicine. Whilst
Western medicine mostly takes into account symptoms and signs
as subjective and objective manifestations of a disease, Chinese
medicine takes into account many different manifestations as
parts of a whole picture, many of them not related to an actual
disease process. Chinese medicine uses not only “symptoms and
signs” as such but many other manifestations to form a picture of
621
the disharmony present in a particular person. Thus, the
interrogation extends well beyond the “symptoms and signs”
pertaining to the presenting complaint. For example, if a patient
presents with epigastric pain as the chief complaint, a Western
doctor would enquire about the symptoms strictly relevant to that
complaint (e.g. Is the pain better or worse after eating? Does the
pain come immediately after eating or two hours later? Is there
regurgitation of food? etc.). A Chinese doctor would ask similar
questions but many others too, such as “Are you thirsty?”, “Do you
have a bitter taste in your 
mouth?”, “Do you feel tired?”, etc. Many
of the so-called symptoms and signs of Chinese medicine would
not be considered as such in Western medicine. For example,
absence of thirst (which confirms a Cold condition), inability to
make decisions (which points to a deficiency of the Gall-Bladder),
dislike of speaking (which indicates a deficiency of the Lungs),
propensity to outbursts of anger (which confirms the rising of
Liver-Yang or Liver-Fire), desire to lie down (which indicates a
weakness of the Spleen), dull appearance of the eyes (which points
to a disturbance of the Mind and emotional problems), deep
midline crack on the tongue (which is a sign of propensity to deep
emotional problems), and so on. Whenever I refer to “symptoms
and signs” (which I shall also call “clinical manifestations”), it will
be in the above context.
Tongue And Pulse
It is important to stress that the tongue and the pulse are signs
that may determine a diagnosis, even in the complete absence of
symptoms. In other words, a Slippery pulse is as much a sign of
Phlegm as expectoration of sputum, and a persistently Weak pulse
on the Kidney position is as much as sign of Kidney deficiency as
other symptoms.
For example, a young woman may have a persistently Weak
Kidney pulse without any symptoms of Kidney deficiency: the
Weak Kidney pulse is as much a symptom of Kidney deficiency as
backache, dizziness and tinnitus and we can therefore safely
assume that this patient suffers from a Kidney deficiency.
However, a particular pulse position may become Weak only
622
temporarily through various lifestyle influences and we can reach a
diagnostic conclusion only when the pulse has a particular quality
consistently over a period of a few weeks or more.
The same applies to tongue signs which may appear in the
absence of symptoms. For example, a Swollen tongue with a sticky
coating indicates Phlegm even in the absence of other symptoms
of Phlegm. In other words, such a tongue is as much a sign of
Phlegm as expectoration of sputum.
 
Remember
 
: the tongue or pulse 
alone
 
are enough to
confirm the presence of a pattern of disharmony.
THE ART OF INTERROGATION:
ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS
Diagnosis by interrogation is of course extremely important as, in
the process of identifying a pattern, not all the information is
given by the patient. Indeed, even if it were, it would still need to
be organized in order to identify the pattern or patterns.
Sometimes the absence of a certain symptom or sign is
diagnostically determinant and patients, of course, would not
report symptoms they do not experience. For example, in
distinguishing between a Heat and a Cold pattern, it is necessary
to establish whether a person is thirsty or not, and the absence of
thirst would point to a Cold pattern. The patient would obviously
not volunteer the information of “not being thirsty”.
The art of diagnosis by interrogation consists in asking relevant
questions in relation to a specific patient and a specific condition.
A certain pattern may be diagnosed only when the “right”
questions are asked; if we are not aware of a specific pattern and
do not ask relevant questions, we will never arrive at a correct
diagnosis. For example, if we do not know the existence of the
pattern of “rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel,” we will
obviously not ask the questions which might lead us to diagnose
such a pattern (see below).
The interrogation should not consist of blindly following the
623
traditional list of questions; it should be conducted following a
“lead” with our asking a series of questions to confirm or exclude a
pattern, or patterns, of disharmony that comes to our mind during
the exchange of question and response. Therefore, when we ask
the patient a question we should always ask ourselves 
why
 
we are
asking that question. During an interrogation, we should be
constantly shifting or reviewing our hypotheses about the possible
patterns of disharmony, trying to confirm or exclude certain
patterns by asking the right questions.
For example, a patient may present with chronic headaches and,
even at this very early stage, we are already making a hypothesis
about the possible pattern of disharmony on the basis of our
experience and our knowledge, that is, we are thinking of Liver-
Yang rising because we know it is by far the most common cause
of chronic headaches. We therefore ask questions about the
character and location of the pain: if the patient says that the pain
is throbbing and is located on the temples, even these few details
would 
almost certainly confirm the diagnosis of Liver-Yang rising.
However, we should never stop there and reach premature
conclusions. Instead we should ask further questions to confirm or
exclude the existence of other patterns which also cause
headaches. For example, Phlegm is another common cause of
chronic headaches and we therefore ask this patient first about
other characteristics of the headaches which may confirm Phlegm,
and also about possible symptoms of Phlegm in other parts of the
body: “Does the patient experience a feeling of muzziness in the
head?” “Is the headache sometimes dull and accompanied by a
feeling of heaviness?” If the answer to these questions is
affirmative, we conclude that Phlegm might be a further cause of
the headaches. We then ask other questions related to Phlegm in
other parts of the body; in this particular case, we might ask
whether the patient occasionally expectorates sputum or
sometimes experiences a feeling of oppression in the chest. (
Fig.
28.2
 
).
624
FIG. 28.2
 
Asking the right questions
Another example of the importance of asking the right
questions to confirm or exclude our hypothesis about the pattern
or patterns of disharmony is rebellious Qi of the Penetrating
Vessel. Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel may cause a wide
range of symptoms affecting the whole torso. These may include:
lower abdominal fullness and pain, painful periods, umbilical
fullness and pain, epigastric fullness and pain, a feeling of energy
rising in the abdomen, a feeling of tightness of the chest, slight
breathlessness, palpitations, a feeling of lump in the throat, a
feeling of heat in the face, and anxiety (of course not all these
symptoms need to be present). It may well be that the patient
reports only the symptoms of painful periods and a feeling of
lump in the throat: if we are not familiar with the pattern of
rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel we may not ask the right
questions to uncover other related symptoms and we may
therefore attribute painful periods to Cold in the Uterus (for
example) and the feeling of a lump in the throat to stagnation of
Liver-Qi. Even should we uncover other symptoms mentioned
above, if we are not familiar with the pattern of rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel we may wrongly attribute the above symptoms
to a confusing number of patterns involving many organs instead
of seeing that they are connected with the pattern of rebellious Qi
of the Penetrating Vessel.
TERMINOLOGY PROBLEMS IN
INTERROGATION
625
A potential problem for practitioners in the West is that the
interrogation and the various expressions used to express
symptoms are derived from Chinese experiences and culture and a
Western patient would not necessarily use the same expressions.
This is a problem, however, that can be overcome with experience.
After some years of practice, we can learn to translate the Chinese
way of expressing symptoms and find correlations more common
to Western patients. For example, whereas a Chinese man might
spontaneously say that he has a “distending pain”, an English-
speaking Western patient might say that he feels “bloated” or
“bursting”. The words are different, but the symptom they
describe is the same. With practice and acute observation we
gradually build up a “vocabulary” of symptoms as described by
Western patients. For example, I have come to interpret the
peculiar English expression “a feeling of butterflies in the
stomach” as a symptom of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel.
The translation from Chinese of the terms related to certain
symptoms may also present some problems. The traditional terms
are rich with meaning and sometimes very poetic and are more or
less impossible to translate properly because Western language
cannot convey all the nuances intrinsic in a Chinese character. For
example, I translate the word 
Men
 
as a “feeling of oppression”; an
analysis of the Chinese character, however, which portrays a heart
squashed by a door, conveys the feeling of oppression in a rich,
metaphorical way. What cannot be adequately translated is the
cultural use of this term in China often to imply that the person is
rather “depressed” (as we intend this term in the West) from
emotional problems. As Chinese 
patients seldom admit openly to
being “depressed”, they will often say they experience a feeling of
Men
 
in the chest.
Another example is the term 
Xin Fan
 
, which I translate as
“mental restlessness”: the Chinese characters contain the radical
for “heart”, indicating an emotional cause of this feeling, and the
radical for “fire”, indicating the heating effect of emotional stress
on the Internal Organ; the translation cannot possibly do justice to
the Chinese term and convey its rich inner meaning.
Yet another interesting example is the use of the word 
Ku
 
to
describe certain symptoms: 
Ku
 
means “bitter” and is sometimes
626
used to indicate a pain’s severity. However, the word 
Ku
 
in China
has also a definite emotional connotation implying that the person
has had a “bitter” life and bitter life experiences.
We should not, however, overemphasize the terminology
problems due to cultural differences between China and the West.
Quite frequently, Western patients report symptoms exactly as they
are in Chinese books. For example, a patient recently told me quite
spontaneously “I am often thirsty but I do not feel like drinking”.
PATIENTS’ EXPRESSIONS
It is only after the patient has finished relating the main problems
that we can start asking questions systematically on the basis of
the “10 questions” (see below), but always following the lead given
by what the patient has told us. Often patients have a good insight
as to the main problem in their life; often this is the first
“problem” they report. For example, when asked about what the
main problem was, a 48-year-old man said that he was 
at a cross-
roads in his life
 
, that he 
felt dissatisfied with his work
 
and that he 
was
searching for something more meaningful in his life
 
. This is a good
example of how a patient spontaneously volunteers information
about existential doubts which are obviously at the root of the
physical problems. Of course, it is not always like this: very many
patients cannot see or do not want to see the existential and
spiritual problems in their life and present with a long list of
physical symptoms which hide the true root of their existential 
dis-
ease
 
.
At the beginning of the interrogation, it is important to let
patients speak freely and to make a note of the actual expressions
they use; these are usually quite suggestive and indicative of the
patient’s problem and sometimes also of the aetiology. For
example, if a patient describes feeling “impotent” about a certain
situation, it conveys the idea that the patient feels frustrated (and,
in the case of a man, it may also indicate sexual impotence). It is
particularly important to make a note of the actual expression used
by a patient especially when this is repeated in the course of the
interrogation. For example, a patient may use the expression
“trapped” two or three times, clearly indicating that emotional
627
frustration may be at the root of the problem.
In some cases patients refer to a particular part of the body
several times in the course of the interrogation and this gives a
strong indication of the possible pattern involved. For example, a
patient suffering from chronic mental-emotional problems may
refer to the “throat” three or four times during the course of the
interrogation, saying things such as, “I feel a lump in the throat
when I’m upset”, “My throat often feels dry”, or “I feel my heart in
my throat”: this may suggest a condition of Qi stagnation in the
Liver or Lungs.
The practice of Chinese medicine in the West presents us with
new challenges which Chinese practitioners do not have in China.
Western patients often seek treatment in search of an existential
and spiritual balance, which is not the case in China. We therefore
need to adapt our diagnosis and treatment to the needs of Western
patients. For example, a woman said that she sought treatment
because she wanted “more integration, rhythm and earthedness in
her life”. We therefore need to develop a new knowledge of
patterns and diagnosis which allows us to interpret the needs of
our patients as they report them. In this particular example, I
interpreted this patient’s lack of “earthedness” as being due to a
severe Kidney deficiency which made her feel “without root” (it
would have been a mistake to interpret her word “earthedness” in
a literal sense as necessarily pointing to a deficiency in the Earth
element).
PITFALLS TO AVOID IN
INTERROGATION
The specific interrogation (as defined above), based on questions
that concern the patient’s clinical manifestations, is aimed at
finding the 
pattern
 
of disharmony; the 
general interrogation (about
the patient’s lifestyle, family situation, emotional environment,
living conditions, etc.) is aimed at finding the cause of disease. It
would be wrong to confuse the two and to deduce the pattern of
disharmony from the enquiry about the patient’s lifestyle, work
and family life. I have noticed this occurring in practice many
628
times when a student or practitioner brings a patient to me for a
second opinion: I frequently hear comments such as “Andrew is
under a lot of stress at work and he 
therefore
 
suffers from Liver-Qi
stagnation”. This is an example of how a practitioner may confuse
the general enquiry about the patient’s life to find the 
cause
 
of the
disease with the specific enquiry about clinical manifestations to
find the 
pattern
 
of disharmony. In other words, to go back to the
above example, it would be totally wrong to 
assume
 
that Andrew
suffers from Liver-Qi stagnation on the basis of an enquiry about
his lifestyle, work, etc.: such a diagnosis can be made only on the
basis of a specific enquiry about his clinical manifestations.
Patients might well have a lot of stress in their life, but this does
not necessarily cause Liver-Qi stagnation as emotional strain may
cause many other patterns.
Another possible pitfall is to make a diagnosis of a pattern of
disharmony on the basis of vague and woolly concepts deduced
from observation of the patient’s lifestyle - for example, “Betty
seems to be a very “woody” person, so I thought there was Liver-
Qi stagnation”. Of course, a diagnosis of a person’s prevailing
Element on the basis of the body shape, mannerism, gait and voice
is important (see 
Chapter 1
 
), but this does not always coincide
with the prevailing pattern; in other words, a Wood-type person
will not necessarily suffer from a Liver pattern of disharmony.
A word of caution about the conducting of the interrogation is
called for. As mentioned above, the interrogation is conducted
with close reference to pattern identification and the questions are
aimed at confirming or excluding the existence of a certain pattern
of disharmony in the patient. The diagnostic process starts with
observation skills as soon as a patient walks in; for example, if a
woman patient looks pale, talks with a low voice, and complains of
tiredness and poor appetite, we immediately think of Spleen-Qi
deficiency as a possible pattern, and thus further questions aim to
confirm or disprove the existence of this pattern. In Chinese
medicine, however, it is easy to conduct the interrogation in a way
that might influence the patient and elicit the symptoms that will
force the clinical manifestations into a preconceived pattern; this is
a real danger of Chinese diagnosis. The only way to eliminate this
danger is to keep an open mind; this is extremely important. Going
629
back to the above example, we must at all times be prepared to
contemplate the real possibility that this patient might 
not
 
suffer
from Spleen-Qi deficiency, or that Spleen-Qi deficiency might not
be the only or even the main pattern or problem.
Box 28.2
 
summarizes pitfalls in interrogation.
 
BOX 28.2
 
   
 
PITFALLS IN
INTERROGATION
• 
 
Do not use information about the patient’s lifestyle to
deduce the 
pattern
 
of disharmony (you may deduce the
cause
 
of disease from it).
• 
 
Do not rely exclusively on a patient’s Elemental type
to diagnose a pattern of disharmony.
• 
 
Remember to keep an open mind when diagnosing
the patterns of disharmony.
PROCEDURE FOR INTERROGATION
The interrogation generally follows on from the observation of the
patient’s facial colour, body shape and body movement and
hearing the patient’s voice and other sounds: thus observation
precedes interrogation. As soon as the patient comes in, the
diagnostic process has already started: we observe the movement
of the patient (whether slow or quick, for example), the
complexion, the body shape, to assess it in terms of Five Elements,
the sound of the voice and any smell emanating from the patient.
I usually start the interrogation by asking the patient about the
main problems that bring him or her to me: I let the patient speak
freely first without interrupting. I always make a note of any
peculiar expressions the patient might use. As indicated above,
Western patients will obviously use different expressions from
those used by Chinese patients. I never discount a patient’s turn of
phrase as it can usually be interpreted in terms of Chinese
diagnosis.
Examples of peculiar descriptions of symptoms from my
practice with English patients might include “a feeling of
630
butterflies in the stomach”, a “feeling as if the stomach is having
an argument with itself”, etc. As the patient is describing the main
problem or problems, I am already thinking of various patterns of
disharmony that might be causing it or them, and I therefore start
asking questions to confirm or exclude the particular pattern of
disharmony I had in mind.
After patients have finished reporting the main problems for
which they are seeking help, and after I have broadly decided on
the patterns of disharmony involved, I then proceed to ask more
questions, generally following either the traditional 10 questions
or the 16 questions that are indicated later in this chapter. This is
done for two reasons: first, because the answers to these further
questions may confirm the patterns of disharmony diagnosed and,
second, because they may bring up other problems which the
patient has overlooked.
I generally look at the tongue and feel the pulse towards the end
of the interrogation, again to confirm further the patterns of
disharmony. However, it is important to note that the tongue and
pulse are not simply used to confirm the diagnosis of a pattern of
disharmony: very often they clearly show the existence of other
patterns which were not evident from the symptoms and signs. In
this case, we should never discount the findings of the tongue and
pulse but we should always ask further questions to confirm the
patterns of disharmony shown by the tongue and pulse. Even if
there are no further symptoms, we can still rely on the tongue and
pulse signs as the basis to diagnose a certain pattern of
disharmony. For example, a patient may come to us complaining of
dizziness and, on the basis of symptoms and signs, we diagnose
that the prevailing pattern causing the dizziness is that of Phlegm.
When we then observe the tongue, we find that the tongue,
besides being Swollen (indicating Phlegm) is also clearly Purple;
this is a definite sign of Blood stasis even if the patient has no
symptoms of it.
In a few cases, the tongue and pulse may show conditions that
are actually opposite to that indicated by the patterns of
disharmony. For example, a person may suffer from a very clear
Yang deficiency and the pulse is Rapid or, vice versa, the person
has clear symptoms and signs of Heat but the pulse is Slow. We
631
should never discount these contradictory signs and we should
always try to find their cause.
TIME SCALE OF SYMPTOMS
After this step, I would continue asking other questions, broadly
following the 16 questions discussed below to find out whether
there are other symptoms and signs that the patient might have
forgotten about. This is always followed by asking about past
history of any other diseases or operations.
When asking about various problems the patient has or has had,
it is important to establish the exact time of onset. It is my
experience that patients nearly always underestimate the length of
time that they have suffered from a particular problem. Therefore
if, when asked how long the particular problem has existed, a
patient says “I cannot remember exactly, probably 5-7 years”, we
can be almost certain that the onset was at the higher point of the
range offered by the patient, that is, 7 years or more.
Establishing the time of onset of a problem accurately is
important in many cases because it may establish a causality that
neither the patient nor the doctor or consultant has observed, and
this happens frequently in practice. Examples of events (besides
the traditional causes of disease, e.g. emotional problems, diet,
etc.) that may be the unrecognized trigger of a particular problem
are:
 
• 
 
an operation
• 
 
an accident
• 
 
an immunization
• 
 
the menarche
• 
 
the menopause
• 
 
childbirth.
For example, a patient may develop abdominal pain after an
abdominal operation from adhesions; someone may develop
backache and neck ache after an accident which had been
forgotten; postviral fatigue syndrome (myeloencephalitis, ME) may
632
develop after a series of immunizations prior to travel abroad;
young girls suffering from migraine may have forgotten that the
onset coincided with the menarche (this has important
repercussions on the diagnosis and treatment); a change in the
emotional state may be related to the onset of the menopause;
asthma or migraine may start after childbirth.
Box 28.3
 
summarizes the main “trigger events” in patients”
lives.
 
BOX 28.3
 
   
 
TRIGGER EVENTS IN
PATIENTS” LIVES
• 
 
An operation
• 
 
An accident
• 
 
An immunization
• 
 
The menarche
• 
 
The menopause
• 
 
Childbirth
INTEGRATION OF INTERROGATION
WITH OBSERVATION
The interrogation should be integrated seamlessly with
observation. All the time while the patient is talking we should
observe the facial complexion, the eyes and other features; this is
important not only for the observation itself but also to observe
any changes that take place during the interrogation. For example,
frequently women develop a light, red rash on the neck as they
relate their symptoms; I interpret this as a sign of Liver-Heat and
one that often reflects the emotional origin of a problem.
Another possible change that should be observed during the
interrogation is a change in the tone and pitch of voice. If the voice
becomes weaker and sounds sad, this indicates that sadness or
grief are at the root of the problem, in particular of the specific
problem being related. For example, if a woman’s voice becomes
weak and sad as she reports that her periods have stopped, it may
indicate that sadness or grief affecting the Lungs and Heart are the
633
root of this particular problem. Conversely, if the voice becomes
stronger and assumes a higher pitch as the patient relates a
particular problem, it may indicate that that problem is due to
anger or repressed anger. Often a patient may try to hide a
particular emotion; for example by laughing inappropriately
during the interrogation; the hidden emotion is often sadness or
grief, especially in societies where expression of one’s feelings is
somewhat discouraged.
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS AND
INTERROGATION
After the patient has finished describing the main problem or
problems, we start asking questions to organize the presenting
symptoms and signs into patterns. While we ask questions, we still
observe the complexion, eyes, shape of facial features, sound of
voice, smells, etc., to be integrated with the findings from the
interrogation. Once we are reasonably confident in having
identified the pattern or patterns involved, we must continue the
interrogation often to 
exclude
 
or confirm the presence of other
patterns that may stem from the existing ones. For example, if
there is Liver-Blood deficiency, I would always check whether this
has given rise to Heart-Blood deficiency (especially if the
observation leads me to believe this) and would therefore ask
questions to exclude (or confirm) the presence of this pattern. If
there is a Liver deficiency, in women especially (for example, if a
woman suffers from amenorrhoea), even though the pattern of
Liver-Blood deficiency may be very clear, I would always check
whether there is a Kidney deficiency. If there is Liver-Qi
stagnation, I would check whether this has given rise to some
Heat; if there is a Spleen deficiency, I would check whether there is
also a Stomach deficiency, etc.
It is important to remember, therefore, that the interrogation is
aimed not only at finding out the main pattern or patterns of
disharmony but often also at excluding certain patterns of
disharmony. 
Table 28.1
 
shows the main patterns that I usually
exclude or confirm in the presence of a presenting pattern.
634
Table 28.1
Patterns to exclude or confirm in the presence of presenting
patterns
Presenting pattern
Pattern to exclude or confirm
Liver-Qi stagnation
Liver-Blood deficiency
Liver-Qi stagnation
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat
Liver-Qi stagnation
Liver-Blood stasis
Liver-Blood deficiency
Heart-Blood deficiency (and vice versa)
Liver-Blood deficiency
Liver-Yin deficiency
Liver-Blood deficiency
Kidney deficiency
Liver-Yang rising
Liver-Yin deficiency
Liver-Yang rising
Kidney deficiency
Liver-Yang rising
Liver-Blood deficiency
Liver-Yang rising
Liver-Fire
Liver-Fire
Heart-Fire
Heart-Blood deficiency
Liver-Blood deficiency
Heart-Fire
Liver-Fire
Heart-Yin deficiency
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dampness (and vice versa)
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Lung-Qi deficiency
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Lung-Yin deficiency
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Liver-, Heart- or Lung-Yin deficiency
Invasion of Wind
Check for symptoms of interior transmission
TONGUE AND PULSE DIAGNOSIS:
INTEGRATION WITH INTERROGATION
Finally, I look at the tongue and feel the pulse: this is done not only
to 
confirm
 
the pattern or patterns identified from the interrogation
but also to see whether the tongue and pulse indicate the presence
of patterns not evident from the clinical manifestations. This
occurs frequently in practice and is the real value of tongue and
pulse diagnosis; if tongue and pulse diagnosis were used simply to
confirm a diagnosis, there would be no point in carrying out this
step.
Very often the tongue and pulse add valuable information to the
findings from interrogation and should never be discounted. For
example, a patient may complain of various symptoms and we
diagnose Liver-Qi stagnation; if the tongue has a deep Heart crack,
635
this tells us that the patient has a constitutional tendency to Heart
patterns and a constitutional tendency to be more affected by
emotional problems. 
Case history 28.1
 
is a good illustration of this.
 
Case History 28.1
A 24-year-old woman complained of chronic aches in
her knees, wrists and ankles. She also suffered from
chronic tiredness, dizziness and loose stools. Her
periods were regular and lasted only 3 days. Apart from
this, she had no other symptoms. Her clinical
manifestations indicate a deficiency of Blood (tiredness,
dizziness, scanty periods) and a Spleen deficiency
(tiredness, loose stools). The joint ache may be due to
invasion of Cold and Dampness (she lived in a
particularly damp area of the British Isles) but it is also
aggravated by the underlying Blood deficiency (Liver-
Blood not nourishing the sinews).
However, the pulse and tongue indicated totally
different patterns. Her pulse was Overflowing on both
Front positions and her tongue was very Red, with a
redder tip with red points and a Heart crack. Thus,
every sign of the pulse and tongue clearly indicated
Heart-Fire; she had not related any symptom that
would indicate this apart from thirst (which I asked her
about after seeing her tongue and feeling her pulse). I
came to the conclusion that she was suffering from
severe emotional problems that were probably quite
long standing and deriving from her childhood (due to
the Heart crack). The acupuncturist who had been
treating her and had referred her to me confirmed this.
This is therefore a good example of a case when the
pulse and tongue throw an entirely different light on
the diagnosis; for this reason, the findings of pulse and
tongue diagnosis should never be discarded when they
do not fit the symptoms and signs. A further
confirmation of the accuracy of the diagnosis based on
the pulse and tongue was the patient’s reaction to the
herbal formula prescribed. I totally ignored the
presenting symptoms and, only on the basis of the
636
findings from the pulse and tongue, prescribed a
variation of the formula Gan Mai Da Zao Tang
Glycyrrhiza-Triticum-Zizyphus Decoction
 
(which calms
the Mind and nourishes the Heart) with the addition of
Yuan Zhi 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
, Shi Chang Pu
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
and Long Chi 
Dens Draconis
 
with
good results.
 
Remember
 
: the tongue and pulse may indicate the
presence of patterns not evident from the clinical
manifestations.
Case history 28.2
 
is another example of the importance of pulse
and tongue in diagnosis and how these two factors can point to a
completely different set of patterns which would not emerge from
a superficial examination of symptoms.
 
Case History 28.2
A 33-year-old woman had been suffering from
abdominal distension and pain for 6 years. Her bowel
movements were regular, occurring every day. She was
under stress at work. She appeared as a very confident
and balanced young professional woman.
Diagnosis
 
: At fist sight, this seems an obvious and
simple case of Liver-Qi stagnation deriving from stress
at work and probably an irregular diet (these two
causes of disease often go together). However, her pulse
and tongue showed a totally different story. Her tongue
was Red on the sides, and had a deep Heart crack and a
sticky-yellow coating. Her pulse was Slippery and quite
Overflowing on the Heart position. Her eyes lacked
lustre.
The deep Heart crack on the tongue clearly indicates
deep-seated and long-standing emotional problems
637
that go beyond just stress at work; this was confirmed
by the Overflowing quality of the Heart pulse and the
lack of lustre of her eyes. Therefore, the tongue and
pulse showed a completely different picture to the
image she tried to project: she obviously suffered from
deep emotional problems most probably dating back to
her childhood or teenage years. I did not feel it
appropriate to delve into this during the first
consultation but, on asking, she did confirm that she
suffered from deep depressions, irregular moods,
gloominess, irritability and anxiety.
Besides giving extremely valuable information for diagnosis, the
tongue and pulse are very important also to determine the
treatment principle. In fact, they are very important to help us
discriminate when a Fullness or Emptiness predominates. For
example, in chronic ME (postviral fatigue syndrome), there is
always a combination of Dampness (or Damp-Heat) with Spleen
deficiency; it is therefore important to determine whether we
should concentrate on tonifying the Spleen or on resolving
Dampness. The tongue and pulse are important to help in
determining this: if the tongue has a fairly thick coating and the
pulse is Slippery, we should probably concentrate on resolving
Dampness.
An even more important case is that of cancer. I usually use
Chinese medicine as an adjuvant to Western therapies for cancer.
Thus, if a patient is undergoing chemotherapy, I would not treat
the cancer but would support the body’s Qi and the immune
system with herbs to tonify Qi, Blood or Yin. After the end of
chemotherapy or after surgery, I assess the tongue and pulse to get
an idea of whether the patterns that caused the cancer are still
active. In other words, even after surgery to remove a tumour
(normally caused by Blood stasis, Phlegm or Toxic Heat, or a
combination of these), I assess the situation to determine whether
such pathogenic factors are still present and how “active” they are.
The tongue and pulse are important to determine this: if the
638
tongue is Red, with red points and a sticky coating, and the pulse
is Rapid and Slippery or Wiry, I assume that, in spite of the surgery,
the pathogenic factors are very much active and I therefore
administer herbs aimed at expelling such factors, together with
anticancer herbs. If, on the other hand, the tongue is not Red and
does not have red points or a sticky coating, and the pulse is Weak,
Deep and Fine, I dedicate my attention to tonifying the body’s Qi
and strengthening the immune system.
Case histories 28.3
 
and 
28.4
 
illustrate the process of
interrogation.
 
Case History 28.3 (Fig. 28.3)
A 37-year-old woman comes in: she is rather thin, pale
without “lustre”, she walks slowly and her voice is
rather low. As she sits down, we notice that her hair is
dry and lifeless and that she looks and sounds in rather
low spirits. At this point, a first tentative diagnosis is
made already as the thin body, dull-pale complexion,
dry hair and low spirits all point to Blood deficiency
(this tentative conclusion is illustrated by a triangle):
we know that this is all the more likely as Blood
deficiency is common in women. However, as
mentioned above, we must absolutely keep an open
mind and be prepared to acknowledge that the patient
does not suffer from Blood deficiency: if we do not keep
an open mind, there may be the danger that our whole
interrogation is biased, “forcing” the clinical
manifestations into the preconceived pattern of Blood
deficiency.
639
FIG. 28.3
 
Case history 28.3
 
: process
As we ask her about her chief complaint, she reports
suffering from premenstrual tension, something that
does not directly confirm the diagnosis of Blood
deficiency. Since the main complaint is premenstrual
tension (illustrated by a double-line box), we
immediately think of Liver-Qi stagnation first as this is
the most common cause of this condition (illustrated by
a triangle): however, we also keep in mind that there are
other possible causes of premenstrual tension, some
Full (such as Phlegm-Fire) and some Empty (such as
Liver-Blood deficiency or Kidney deficiency). We
therefore start asking questions to confirm or exclude
Liver-Qi stagnation. The questions and answers are as
follows:
• 
 
What are the main manifestations of the
premenstrual tension: irritability or depression? She
says both, but more depression and crying than
irritability. We ask this question to help differentiate a
Full (in which irritability predominates) from an Empty
(in which depression predominates) condition of
premenstrual tension.
640
• 
 
Is there breast distension? Yes. We ask this question
to confirm whether or not there is Liver-Qi stagnation: a
pronounced feeling of distension indicates Liver-Qi
stagnation. In this case, there is a feeling of distension
but it is not that pronounced.
• 
 
Is there epigastric or abdominal distension? Very
little.
• 
 
Is the period cycle regular? Yes. We ask this question
to confirm whether there is Liver-Qi stagnation or not,
as a severe Liver-Qi stagnation may make the period
irregular.
• 
 
Is the period painful? No, but there is distension. We
ask this question because we have ascertained that there
is some Liver-Qi stagnation and the next step is to
enquire whether this has led to Blood stasis: the absence
of menstrual pain tells us that there is no Blood stasis.
• 
 
What colour is the menstrual blood? Bright-red. We
ask this question as a further aid to confirm or exclude
the presence of Blood stasis: the bright-red colour
confirms that there is no Blood stasis.
• 
 
How many days does the period last? Three days. This
confirms that there is Blood deficiency.
At this point, a further picture is tentatively created
in our mind: it seems quite clear now that there is some
Liver-Qi stagnation causing the premenstrual tension
but this is not too pronounced and most probably is
secondary to the Liver-Blood deficiency (a situation that
is very common in women). This conclusion is
illustrated by a single-line box. It remains now to check
that there are no other patterns: a very common one in
this situation would be a Kidney deficiency. We
therefore ask the following questions:
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from backache? No.
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from dizziness? Yes.
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from tinnitus? No.
• 
 
Is your urination too frequent? No.
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from night sweating? No.
The absence of backache, tinnitus, frequent urination
641
and night sweating indicates the absence of a Kidney
deficiency (this is indicated by a dotted box); although
there is some dizziness, in the absence of other Kidney
symptoms it must be caused by the Blood deficiency. In
order to confirm the diagnosis of Blood deficiency
unequivocally, we ask a few more questions about this:
• 
 
Do you ever experience some tingling of the limbs?
Yes.
• 
 
Do you ever experience blurred vision? Yes,
sometimes.
• 
 
Do you ever feel depressed? Yes.
• 
 
Do you ever have a feeling of aimlessness or
confusion about what direction to take in life? Yes.
These four further symptoms confirm the deficiency
of Liver-Blood unequivocally: the depression, feeling of
aimlessness and confusion about life’s direction are due
to the Ethereal Soul being unrooted in Liver-Blood.
Why deficiency of Blood of the Liver and not of other
organs? The scanty period, dry hair and blurred vision
point to Blood deficiency of the Liver. However, we
should check whether there might not be also a Blood
deficiency of another organ and especially of the Heart.
We therefore ask the following questions:
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from palpitations? No.
• 
 
Do you suffer from insomnia? No.
The answer to these two questions allows us to
exclude the presence of Heart-Blood deficiency
(illustrated by a dotted box). Finally, as there is Liver-
Blood deficiency, we should check whether this has
progressed to Liver-Yin deficiency. We therefore ask the
following questions:
• 
 
Do you ever suffer from dry eyes? No.
• 
 
Dry and brittle nails? No.
• 
 
Dry menstrual blood? No.
The negative answer to these three questions tells us
that there is no Liver-Yin deficiency (illustrated by a
dotted box). Thus, we have established that the main
problem is a deficiency of Liver-Blood giving rise to a
642
secondary stagnation of Liver-Qi; the fact that the Liver-
Qi stagnation is secondary is important for the
treatment principle as this means that we should
concentrate our attention on nourishing Liver-Blood
and only secondarily on moving Liver-Qi.
Before concluding the interrogation, we should ask
about any other symptoms to make sure that there are
no other patterns; we therefore ask about any headache,
chest pain, abdominal pain, stools and urine, sleep and
sweating: no further symptoms are reported.
It is now time to look at the tongue and feel the
pulse. Her tongue is Pale, slightly Swollen, especially on
the sides and with a sticky-white coating. Her pulse was
Choppy on the left and Weak on the right.
Being Pale, the tongue confirms the Blood deficiency
but it also shows other patterns that had not emerged
from the interrogation: the swelling on the sides
indicates Spleen deficiency and the sticky coating
indicates Dampness. A Spleen deficiency with some
Dampness is one of the most common conditions in
practice and it is therefore not surprising to find it
reflected on this patient’s tongue. Having noticed this
on her tongue we must go back to ask some more
questions to confirm that there is a Spleen deficiency
with some Dampness. We therefore ask the following:
• 
 
Do you feel easily tired? Yes. This tells us that there
might be some Spleen deficiency.
• 
 
How is your appetite? Poor.
• 
 
Do you have any digestive problems? Fullness after
eating? A sticky taste? Epigastric pain? The patient
reports no epigastric pain but does have some feeling of
fullness after eating. This confirms the Dampness.
• 
 
Do you ever experience a feeling of heaviness? Yes,
slightly. This further confirms the presence of
Dampness.
As for the pulse, the Weak quality on the right
confirms the Spleen deficiency while the Choppy
quality on the left confirms the Blood deficiency.
643
In conclusion, there is Liver-Blood deficiency, Spleen-
Qi deficiency, a secondary stagnation of Liver-Qi and
some Dampness; thus, there are two Empty and two
Full patterns. The Empty character of the pulse is
important in guiding us to the right treat-ment
principle, which in this case must be pri-marily to
nourish Liver-Blood and tonify Spleen-Qi and
secondarily to move Liver-Qi and resolve Dampness.
 
Case History 28.4 (Fig. 28.4)
A 42-year-old woman complains of having suffered
benign positional vertigo for the last 20 years. As she
comes in, we notice that she is thin, she walks rather
slowly, she is quiet, her voice is low and her eyes are
slightly dull. These signs derived from observation give
us a very first impression of her condition and they
clearly point to a deficiency. In addition, the dullness of
her eyes indicates that emotional problems may be the
cause of her condition. As she sits down, we start
asking about her symptoms in greater detail. She says
that she has been suffering from infrequent attacks of
vertigo for the past 20 years and that these got worse
and more frequent after the birth of her second
daughter two and a half years ago. The aggravation of
the symptoms after childbirth leads us to think of a
Kidney deficiency as one of the possible patterns.
During the attacks of vertigo, she suffers from very
severe dizziness so that the room seems to be spinning
around and she vomits; the attacks usually occur in the
mornings and are aggravated by lying down and
ameliorated by sitting. The severity of the vertigo
clearly indicates that it is due to a Full pattern;
therefore, from the few signs and symptoms gleaned
from the initial observation and interrogation, we can
conclude that there is a mixed condition of Fullness and
644
Emptiness. The severe vertigo could be due to either
Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Wind. In between the attacks
of severe vertigo she also suffers from bouts of mild
dizziness. In contrast to the attacks of severe vertigo,
the bouts of mild dizziness must be due to a deficiency,
probably of the Kidneys. At this point we have reached
some temporary conclusions and we can hypothesize
that she suffers from Liver-Yang rising (causing the
severe vertigo and possibly vomiting) stemming from a
Kidney deficiency (causing the bouts of mild dizziness
and also the aggravation of vertigo after childbirth).
FIG. 28.4
 
Case history 28.4
 
: process
We now need to ask about other symptoms and she
reports feeling cold in general and suffering from
chilblains in winter. In order to confirm or exclude the
pattern of Kidney deficiency we ask about backache,
tinnitus, night sweating and urination: she does suffer
from chronic lower backache and frequent urination
with pale urine. Considering the general cold feeling,
the backache, the frequent urination, the bouts of mild
645
dizziness and the aggravation after childbirth, we can
diagnose the pattern of Kidney-Yang deficiency. We can
also deduce that the Kidney deficiency is the
underlying condition for the rising of Liver-Yang.
We then ask about her periods, an essential question
in all women, and she reports no problems in this area:
the periods come regularly, they are not too heavy or
too scanty and not painful.
As we know that Phlegm is a frequent cause of
dizziness and vertigo, we need to ask questions to
confirm or exclude the possibility of the interaction of
Phlegm and Liver-Yang rising as a cause of her vertigo.
Her body shape does not point to Phlegm as she is thin
(Phlegm tends to cause obesity); however, that is not to
say that thin people never suffer from Phlegm. We ask
her whether she suffers from catarrh and she does say
that she often has to clear her throat in the morning
and if she gets a cold, it frequently goes to her chest
producing a lot of sputum. She also occasionally suffers
from a feeling of oppression of the chest; these
symptoms together with the vomiting during the
attacks of vertigo point to Phlegm as a concurrent cause
of vertigo.
Her tongue has Red sides and apart from that it is
fairly normal; the tongue therefore does not show any
signs of Phlegm as it is not Swollen and does not have a
sticky coating. This does not mean that there is no
Phlegm but simply that Phlegm is an accompanying
pattern and a further cause of the vertigo secondary to
that of Liver-Yang rising. Her pulse is Weak in general,
Choppy and Weak on the left and especially Weak on
both the Rear positions. The pulse therefore clearly
shows only the deficiency patterns of her condition,
that is, Kidney-Yang deficiency and Spleen-Qi
deficiency, which is at the root of Phlegm. This is a clear
example of a case when the pulse and tongue show
different aspects of the condition: the pulse shows the
underlying deficiency condition whereas the tongue
646
shows Liver-Yang rising. We should not expect the
pulse and the tongue always to accord with each other
(in this case, we might have expected a Wiry pulse to
accord with the Red sides of the tongue) as they often
show different aspects of a complex condition.
In conclusion, there are two deficiency patterns:
Kidney-Yang deficiency and Spleen-Qi deficiency
(which are the Root), and two full patterns: Liver-Yang
rising and Phlegm (which are the Manifestation). As far
as the severe vertigo is concerned, Liver-Yang rising is
primary in relation to Phlegm. The treatment principle
in this case would therefore be to treat both the Root
and the Manifestation by simultaneously tonifying
Kidney-Yang, tonifying Spleen-Qi, subduing Liver-Yang
and resolving Phlegm. In this case we treat the Root
and the Manifestation simultaneously because the
attacks of vertigo are relatively infrequent, coming
about every 6 months; had the attacks of vertigo been
much more frequent, we should have concentrated on
treating the Manifestation, that is, subduing Liver-Yang
and resolving Phlegm.
In conclusion, 
Box 28.4
 
lists the order I usually follow in my
interrogation.
 
BOX 28.4
 
   
 
ORDER OF QUESTIONS IN
INTERROGATION
• 
 
Ask about the presenting problem letting the patient
speak freely.
• 
 
Ask specific questions to determine the pattern or
patterns causing the presenting problem. or problems
trying to establish the time of onset accurately.
• 
 
Ask questions to exclude or confirm other patterns.
• 
 
Ask more questions broadly following the 16
questions.
• 
 
Ask about past diseases and operations.
647
• 
 
Look at the tongue and feel the pulse.
• 
 
Ask about any family illnesses such as asthma,
eczema, heart disease.
• 
 
Inquire about the patient’s emotional life, family life
and working conditions to try to establish the 
cause
 
of
the disease.
THE 10 TRADITIONAL QUESTIONS
The interrogation is traditionally carried out on the basis of 10
questions. This practice was started by Zhang Jing Yue (1563-1640)
but the 10 questions used by subsequent doctors differed slightly
from those found in Dr Zhang’s book. The 10 questions proposed
by Zhang Jing Yue were as follows:
 
1. 
 
Aversion to cold and fever
2. 
 
Sweating
3. 
 
Head and body
4. 
 
The two excretions
5. 
 
Food and drink
6. 
 
Chest and abdomen
7. 
 
Deafness
8. 
 
Thirst
9. 
 
Previous illnesses
10. 
 
Causes of disease.
Besides these questions, Zhang Jing Yue added two more, one
regarding women’s gynaecological history and the other regarding
children, which makes a total of 12 questions.
Although these are usually referred to in Chinese books as
“questions”, they rather represent areas of questioning. These
varied a lot over the centuries, as different doctors placed the
emphasis on different questions.
The most commonly used areas of questioning mentioned in
648
modern Chinese books are 10, as listed in 
Box 28.5
 
.
 
BOX 28.5
 
   
 
THE 10 QUESTIONS
1. 
 
Aversion to cold and fever
2. 
 
Sweating
3. 
 
Head and body
4. 
 
Chest and abdomen
5. 
 
Food and taste
6. 
 
Stools and urine
7. 
 
Sleep
8. 
 
Hearing and tinnitus
9. 
 
Thirst and drink
10. 
 
Pain
Two areas of questioning are added for women and children,
making a total of 12. It must be stressed that not all these
questions need be asked in every situation, nor are these the only
possible questions since each situation requires an individual
approach and other questions may be relevant.
Limitations Of The 10 Traditional Questions
One need not necessarily follow the above order of questioning. In
fact, I personally never do because the above order is strongly
biased towards an interrogation of a patient suffering from an
acute, exterior condition, hence the prominent place afforded to
the question about “aversion to cold and fever” which, in Chinese
books, always comes first. In interior conditions, I do ask about
sensation of heat or cold to establish or confirm whether there is
internal Cold or internal Heat, but usually towards the end of the
interrogation.
There is no reason why we should limit our interrogation rigidly
to the traditional 10 questions. Each patient is different, with
different causes of disease and different patterns of disharmony,
and we need to adapt our questions to each patient’s unique
situation. Moreover, we need to respond to a patient’s mental state
649
during an interrogation with sensitivity and flexibility to put a
patient at ease, especially during the first consultation. It would be
wrong, therefore, to ask the 10 questions routinely without
adapting one’s approach to the concrete situation. For example, it
might well be that a patient bursts into tears as soon as he or she
describes his or her main problem and we should react to this
situation in a sensitive and sympathetic manner.
The 10 questions, as the basis of the interrogation in Chinese
diagnosis, were formulated during the early Qing dynasty in
China, thus at a time and in a culture very different than ours. We
should therefore not hesitate to change the structure and contents
of our interrogation to make it more suitable to our time and
culture.
I would add the following to the traditional 10 questions:
 
• 
 
emotions
• 
 
sexual symptoms
• 
 
energy levels.
In addition, I introduce a separate area of questioning
concerning the limbs which traditionally is included under
“body”.
Questions On Emotional State
An enquiry about the emotional life of the patient plays a role
both in the general enquiry to find the 
cause
 
of the disharmony and
in the specific enquiry to find the 
pattern
 
of disharmony. A
prevailing emotional state is a clinical manifestation just as any
other and it is therefore an important part of the pattern of
disharmony. For example, a propensity to anger is a strong
indication of Liver-Yang or Liver-Fire rising, sadness often
indicates a Lung deficiency, obsessive thinking points to a Spleen
pattern, etc.
It may be that, for cultural reasons, there is no specific question
regarding the emotional state of the patient among the traditional
10 questions: Chinese patients tend not to talk about their
650
emotions and often express them as physical symptoms as a kind
of agreed “code” between patient and doctor. I list a few examples
of the emotional meaning of various symptoms expressed by
Chinese patients below:
 
1. 
 
“Feeling of oppression of chest” (
Xiong Men
 
) often
means that the patient is depressed.
2. 
 
“Intense thirst” often indicates that the patient is
angry.
3. 
 
“Tiredness and dizziness” in a woman often means
that she is depressed.
4. 
 
“Lack of appetite” often means that the patient is
depressed or experiences sexual frustration (the same
emotions in a Western patient would be more likely to
induce him or her to eat more and “pick” all the time).
5. 
 
“Insomnia and palpitations” may indicate intense
anxiety and fear.
6. 
 
“Bitter pain” may indicate bitter experiences in the
patient’s life or a state of being embittered.
7. 
 
“Nausea” may indicate that the patient is worried or
frustrated or depressed.
Questions About Sexual Life
Modern Chinese doctors never ask about sexual symptoms owing
to the modern Chinese prudery in sexual matters. However, this
should always form part of the interrogation as it provides further
information on the symptomatology of the patient to arrive at a
pattern of disharmony.
Questions On Energy Levels
An enquiry about energy levels is extremely important as it gives a
very simple clue to the presence of a possible Deficiency pattern
(excluding the few cases when a person may feel tired from Excess
conditions). This question is all the more important since lack of
energy is probably one of the main reasons for Western people to
651
consult a practitioner of Chinese medicine.
THE 16 QUESTIONS
Thus, bearing in mind the three new questions on the emotional
state, sexual symptoms and energy levels and a different order of
questioning, I would therefore propose to revise the traditional 10
questions, making up a total of 16 questions as listed in 
Box 28.6
 
.
 
BOX 28.6
 
   
 
THE 16 QUESTIONS
1. 
 
Pain
2. 
 
Food and taste
3. 
 
Stools and urine
4. 
 
Thirst and drink
5. 
 
Energy levels
6. 
 
Head, face and body
7. 
 
Chest and abdomen
8. 
 
Limbs
9. 
 
Sleep
10. 
 
Sweating
11. 
 
Ears and eyes
12. 
 
Feeling of cold, feeling of heat and fever
13. 
 
Emotional symptoms
14. 
 
Sexual symptoms
15. 
 
Women’s symptoms
16. 
 
Children’s symptoms
Apart from adding four questions (on pain, emotional state,
sexual symptoms and energy levels), I have changed the order of
the traditional 10 questions in accordance with my clinical
experience with Western patients and have split some questions
into two (for example, “Food and drink” into “Food and taste” and
“Thirst and drink”).
I have relegated the questions about aversion to cold and fever
652
to twelfth place because they are usually asked towards the end of
the interrogation to confirm the Hot or Cold nature of a particular
pattern. The prominent place afforded to aversion to cold or fever
in the traditional 10 questions is due to historical reasons; in fact,
in the times when the traditional 10 
questions were formulated,
febrile diseases were extremely common in China and would have
formed the major part of a doctor’s practice.
I have placed the questions on pain in first place in the revised
16 questions because that is by far the most common problem that
Western patients present in a modern practice. The question on
pain is followed by those about food, bowels, urination and thirst,
again because these questions cover a very large area of digestive
and urinary problems in the patients we see. The order in which
the questions are listed is not necessarily that in which they are
asked; for example, in women, the questions about their
gynaecological system would be asked fairly early in the
interrogation.
The discussion that follows will often list the clinical
significance of a given symptom, for example “night sweating
indicates Yin deficiency” or “thirst indicates Heat”. It should be
pointed out that this approach actually contradicts the very
essence of Chinese diagnosis and patterns according to which it is
the 
picture
 
formed by a number of symptoms and signs, rather
than individual symptoms, that matters. No symptom or sign can
be seen in isolation from the pattern of which it forms part: it is
the landscape that counts, not individual features. Thus it is wrong
to say “night sweating indicates Yin deficiency”; we should say “in
the presence of malar flush, a Red tongue without coating and a
dry throat at night, night sweating indicates Yin deficiency, while
in the presence of a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, a bitter
taste, epigastric fullness, night sweating indicates Damp-Heat”. It
is only for didactic purposes that we need to list symptoms and
signs in isolation with their possible diagnostic significance.
However, after years of practice, in some cases one can deduce
the pattern even from an isolated symptom or sign; this is possible
because each symptom or sign within a pattern bears within it the
“imprint” of the whole pattern. This can be deduced mostly from
observation or hearing/smelling. For example, “mental
653
restlessness” may be due to Full- or Empty-Heat as indicated
above and the diagnosis should be made on the basis of
accompanying symptoms. However, an experienced practitioner is
able to simply observe the patient and form an idea of whether the
“mental restlessness” derives from Full- or Empty-Heat. It is
difficult to describe how this is done, but mental restlessness from
Full-Heat manifests with more agitation, it is more “solid” and the
patient is more restless; when mental restlessness is due to Empty-
Heat, the patient is restless but in a quieter way, there is a vague
feeling of anxiety without knowing why and the patient generally
looks more deficient.
Another example would be that of cough, in this case using
diagnosis from hearing. Simply by hearing the patient cough, an
experienced practitioner can deduce not only whether the cough
occurs within a pattern of Phlegm or Dryness, but even whether it
is Cold-Phlegm, Damp-Phlegm or Phlegm-Heat.
654
CHAPTER 29
 
PAIN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
AREA OF PAIN
NATURE OF PAIN
Soreness
Pain with a sensation of heaviness
Distending pain
Pain with a feeling of fullness
Pain with a feeling of emptiness
Pain with a feeling of cold
Burning pain
Colicky pain
Spastic pain
Pain with a distressing feeling
Pain with a sensation of stuffiness
Pushing pain
Pulling pain
655
Cutting pain
Throbbing pain
Boring pain
Lurking pain
TIME OF PAIN
FACTORS AFFECTING PAIN
Pressure
Temperature
Food and drink
Bowel movement
Movement and rest
ORGAN VERSUS CHANNEL PAIN
INTRODUCTION
As mentioned in 
Chapter 28
 
, I have changed the order of the
traditional 10 questions and I assign the first question to pain, but
this is not to say that one should always start by asking about pain.
The order of questioning should be flexible.
In this chapter I will discuss pain and its diagnostic points in
general. Pain in various areas of the body is discussed under the
relevant questions; for example, the diagnosis of chest pain will be
found under the questions related to “Chest and abdomen”.
WHY
 
WE ASK
We need to ask about pain because the character, location and
timing of pain give a clear indication of the Full or Empty character
of the condition and they also clearly indicate various pathogenic
factors such as Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, Dampness, and so on.
Obviously, another reason for asking about pain is that it is a
very common complaint, and often the one that leads our patients
656
to seek help.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Obviously we need to ask about pain in great detail when this is
the chief complaint. However, even if the patient comes to us for a
condition that does not involve pain (e.g. asthma), we should
always ask whether the person experiences pain in any part of the
body. On the one hand, this may uncover a condition that the
patient did not report spontaneously and, on the other hand, an
analysis of the character, location 
and timing of pain may help us
to confirm the original diagnosis; indeed, in some cases an
analysis of the pain may also 
add
 
a new dimension to our original
diagnosis. For example, a woman may present with a chief
complaint of mental depression which we diagnose as being
caused by Liver-Qi stagnation; before concluding the interrogation
we should ask whether she experiences any pain in any part of the
body. If the patient tells us that she suffers from abdominal pain
and distension, this would clearly confirm the diagnosis of Liver-
Qi stagnation. To carry the example further, if she also suffers from
severe period pains, with dark, clotted menstrual blood, this
clearly tells us that there is not only Liver-Qi stagnation but also
Liver-Blood stasis. Since the Liver-Blood stasis is shown purely by
the menstrual pain (e.g. the tongue is not Purple) we would not
have known about it if we had not asked about pain.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When asking about pain, we should ask systematically about the
following four aspects:
 
• 
 
location
• 
 
nature
• 
 
timing
• 
 
response to pressure and temperature.
657
Location of pain
The first obvious question is about the location of the pain. It is
important in this respect not to accept automatically the patient’s
description of the location of the pain. Patients often have their
own way of describing a certain location, a common one being
“stomach” when they mean lower abdomen. When the pain is in
the abdomen it is particularly important to establish exactly where
it is, according to the abdominal areas that are described in
Chapter 16
 
, by asking the patient to point to its location. This is
even more important in children whose terminology is obviously
limited and who often refer to “tummy ache”.
In channel problems, it is also important to enquire exactly
about the location of the pain in order to identify the channel or
channels involved. For example, if a patient complains of shoulder
pain, we should enquire clearly whether the pain is in the front of
(Lung channel), the centre (Large Intestine channel) or the back of
the shoulder (Small Intestine channel). However, in channel
problems, the identification of the exact location of the pain must
be done also with the help of palpation.
Nature of pain
After asking about the location, we should then ask about the
nature of the pain. First let the patient describe it spontaneously;
do not suggest any special terms. A potential difficulty here is the
terminology used by the patient, which will obviously be different
from that used in China. With experience, we learn how to
“translate” Western expressions into the Chinese equivalent. For
example, “bloating” indicates “distension”, “feeling like a weight
on the chest” indicates “feeling of oppression”, “feeling like being
pulled down” in the abdomen indicates a “bearing-down” feeling,
and so on. After letting patients describe the nature of the pain, if
it is still necessary, we can then ask about the nature of the pain
according to the traditional Chinese terminology, which, often,
Western patients recognize as a very accurate description of their
pain. For example, in cases of abdominal pain, when we ask, “Is
the pain accompanied by a feeling of heaviness?” many patients
confirm that that is exactly how it feels.
658
Timing of pain
After asking about the location and nature of the pain, we should
then ask about the exact timing of pain as described below.
Factors affecting pain
Finally, we should ask about the reaction to pressure or
temperature. When asking about the reaction of pain to pressure,
it is important to formulate the questions in a way that Western
patients can understand. Rather than asking, “Is the pain better or
worse with pressure?” (as one might do with a Chinese patient),
we should ask something like, “Does the pain feel better if you rub
it or press it, or do you actually dislike its being touched?”
When asking about reaction of the pain to temperature, we
should also do it in a way that is readily understandable to
Western patients. For example, if a patient complains of joint pain,
we should ask whether it feels worse when the weather is cold and
rainy. We should also enquire whether the application of heat or
cold ameliorates or aggravates the pain.
Chinese medicine offers a detailed classification of pain
according to five parameters:
 
• 
 
area of pain
• 
 
nature of pain
• 
 
time of pain
• 
 
factors affecting pain
• 
 
organ versus channel pain.
AREA OF PAIN
Localized pain is usually due to Phlegm, Blood stasis, or
obstruction by Cold or Dampness, or both.
Moving pain is usually due to Qi stagnation (unless it is due to
Wind in the joints).
NATURE OF PAIN
659
In general, a pain or ache that is mild in nature indicates
Deficiency, whereas a sharp, severe pain is due to Fullness. It
should be noted that a mild pain is usually dull and that a “dull”
pain may also be intense. For example, a headache from Blood
deficiency will be mild in its intensity and dull in nature; however,
an occipital headache from invasion of external Cold may be dull
in its nature but very intense. Thus when a patient complains of a
“dull” headache, we should clarify whether this is mild
(suggesting Deficiency) or intense (suggesting Fullness).
The pain from Fullness is due to the obstruction of the channels
by a pathogenic factor. Possible factors are listed in 
Box 29.1
 
.
 
BOX 29.1
 
   
 
PATHOGENIC FACTORS
CAUSING FULL TYPES OF PAIN
• 
 
Exterior pathogenic factor
• 
 
Interior Cold or Heat
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi
• 
 
Stasis of Blood
• 
 
Dampness
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Retention of food
All these pathogenic factors obstruct the circulation of Qi or
Blood, or both, and therefore cause pain. There is a well-known
saying in Chinese medicine that states: “Obstruction causes pain;
if there is no obstruction there is no pain” (
Bu tong ze tong, tong ze
bu tong
 
). Phlegm does not generally cause pain but it may do so in
a few cases.
Deficiency may also cause pain through malnourishment of the
channels. In this case, the pain will be mild, more like an ache, and
will be clearly alleviated by rest.
There are many different types of pain and the main terms are
explained below.
Soreness
660
This is a dull ache that usually occurs in the four limbs or trunk. It
is usually due to a Deficiency condition or to Dampness.
Pain With A Sensation Of Heaviness
This is also a dull ache but accompanied by a sensation of
heaviness; this usually occurs in the limbs, head or the whole body.
It is typical of Dampness or Phlegm.
Distending Pain
This is a pain accompanied by a sensation of distension (bloating).
Chinese patients often actually say they have a “
zhang tong
 
” (i.e. a
distending pain). No Western patient will ever use this actual
expression but this type of pain is very common in Western
patients. In England, they will usually say that they have a pain
with a “bloating” sensation, but very often they will not mention
the bloating unless asked. It is therefore very important to elicit
the exact symptoms and character of pain with a proper
interrogation. A distending pain is typical of Qi stagnation,
especially of the Liver. However, it should be noted that other
organs may suffer from Qi stagnation too, notably the Stomach,
Spleen and Lungs. Thus, a distending pain in the lower abdomen
usually indicates Liver- or Spleen-Qi stagnation, in the
hypochondrium Liver-Qi stagnation, in the epigastrium Stomach-
Qi stagnation, and in the chest Lung-Qi stagnation (although this
last one may also be due to the Liver).
A distending pain in the head, such as that experienced during a
headache or a migraine, is due to Liver-Yang rising. Anglo-Saxon
patients would usually call this pain “throbbing” rather than
“distending”.
“Distension” is both a symptom and a sign, that is, it indicates
the subjective bloating sensation of the 
patient, but the bloating
may also be felt on palpation when the area feels distended like a
drum (this is more easily felt in the epigastrium or lower
abdomen). In gynaecology, a distending pain is seen in
dysmenorrhoea from Liver-Qi stagnation or premenstrual breast
pain and distension also from Liver-Qi stagnation. Pain with
distension is usually of a Full nature. Distending pain is treated
661
with warm-pungent herbs that move Qi.
Box 29.2
 
summarizes the stagnation patterns underlying areas of
distending pain.
 
BOX 29.2
 
   
 
AREAS OF STAGNATION OF
QI
• 
 
Lower abdomen: stagnation of Liver-Qi
• 
 
Hypochondrium: stagnation of Liver-Qi
• 
 
Epigastrium: stagnation of Stomach-Qi
• 
 
Hypochondrium towards epigastrium: Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach
• 
 
Chest: stagnation of Lung-Qi or Liver-Qi
 
Remember:
 
“distension” and “fullness” are not the
same. Distension manifests with a bloated feeling,
whereas fullness manifests with a full feeling.
Pain With A Feeling Of Fullness
This is an ache or pain accompanied by a sensation of fullness; it
usually occurs only in the epigastrium or lower abdomen. A
sensation of fullness should be distinguished from distension
(bloating). With distension, the patient feels bloated (like a drum)
and the area feels like a drum on palpation; with fullness, the
patient feels very full as if after a very heavy meal, perhaps also
with a slight nausea, and the area feels 
hard
 
rather than distended
on palpation. The distension can actually be 
seen
 
(and palpated);
fullness cannot be seen but can be felt on palpation.
Typically, pain with a sensation of fullness indicates retention of
food and is related to the Stomach and Spleen. Pain with a feeling
of fullness is usually of a Full nature. Fullness is treated with
digestive herbs.
Pain With A Feeling Of Emptiness
662
Pain with a feeling of emptiness indicates either Qi and Blood
deficiency or Kidney deficiency and it often occurs in the head.
Pain With A Feeling Of Cold
Pain with a feeling of cold is usually a sharp, stabbing or spastic
pain that is clearly accompanied by a pronounced feeling of cold or
even shivering and is alleviated by the application of heat. This
type of pain usually occurs in the abdomen or limbs and it
indicates Full- or Empty-Cold, or Yang deficiency.
Burning Pain
Burning pain is accompanied by a burning sensation and it always
indicates Heat or Empty-Heat; it may occur in the epigastrium or
in the limbs.
Colicky Pain
This is a sharp pain of a colicky, cramping nature; it occurs in the
epigastrium or, more usually, the lower abdomen. This pain
usually indicates Cold in the Intestines, but it may also be due to
Blood stasis. In gynaecology, this pain is seen in dysmenorrhoea
from Cold in the Uterus. Colicky pain is of a Full nature.
Spastic Pain
This is a sharp pain accompanied by spasm (contraction) or a
sensation of spasm; it usually occurs in the limbs and is related to
the sinews and therefore the Liver. It may be due to Liver-Blood
deficiency in conjunction with Liver-Qi stagnation or Liver-Yang
rising. In the latter instance, it may also occur on the head. Spastic
pain is either of a Full nature or a combination of Deficiency (of
Liver-Blood) and Fullness (stagnation of Qi).
Pain With A Distressing Feeling
This indicates a pain or ache, usually in the epigastrium or chest,
accompanied by a restless, undefined, anxious feeling and perhaps
663
palpitations. It is usually due to retention of Phlegm in the
epigastrium affecting the Heart. It is also a typical symptom of
rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel causing anxiety and
palpitations. This type of pain is usually due to a combination of
Deficiency (of the Liver, Spleen or Kidneys) and Fullness
(rebellious Qi). In gynaecology, this type of pain is seen in
menopausal problems.
Pain With A Sensation Of Stuffiness
This is usually a dull ache accompanied by a feeling of
“stuffiness”; it usually occurs in the epigastrium or chest.
“Stuffiness” may be defined as a mild feeling of fullness with an
important objective difference on palpation: fullness may be felt
on palpation as hardness, whereas with stuffiness the epigastrium
feels soft on palpation. A feeling of ache and stuffiness is usually
due to a combination of Deficiency (of the Spleen) and Fullness
(Heat or Phlegm).
Pushing Pain
This is a sharp pain accompanied by a feeling as if something was
pushing outwards; it occurs in the hypochondrium or epigastrium
and is due to severe Qi stagnation.
Pulling Pain
This is a sharp pain accompanied by a sensation as if the skin were
being pulled; it occurs only on the head and is due to Liver-Wind.
It is of a Full nature (although Liver-Wind itself may derive from a
Blood or Yin deficiency).
Cutting Pain
This is a very sharp pain that feels like a knife. It usually occurs in
the lower abdomen and is due to Blood stasis. It is definitely Full
in nature.
664
Throbbing Pain
This pain is usually severe and it feels as if there was a throbbing
or pulsation. It usually occurs on the head from Liver-Yang rising.
It is of a Full nature (although Liver-Yang may rise from Blood or
Yin deficiency).
Boring Pain
This is a severe pain that feels like the tip of a knife-blade, a nail or
a screw; it is fixed in its location. It is due to Blood stasis and is
Full in nature. It may occur in the lower abdomen, epigastrium,
hypochondrium, chest or head. In gynaecology, it is seen in
dysmenorrhoea from Blood stasis.
Lurking Pain
Lurking pain, in Chinese called 
Yin Tong
 
, which means “latent,
hidden or lurking” pain, is not severe, is not acute, is relatively
easy to endure but chronic and persistent. It indicates Qi and
Blood deficiency or Empty-Cold in the Interior leading to
malnourishment of the channels. Lurking pain usually improves
with the application of heat; it generally occurs in the abdomen or
lower back.
Box 29.3
 
summarizes the types of pain.
 
BOX 29.3
 
   
 
TYPES OF PAIN
• 
 
Soreness: Deficiency (four limbs or trunk) or
Dampness
• 
 
Heaviness: Dampness or Phlegm (limbs, head or
whole body)
• 
 
Distending: Qi stagnation (hypochondrium,
epigastrium, lower abdomen, chest, head)
• 
 
Fullness: retention of food (epigastrium, lower
abdomen)
• 
 
Emptiness: Qi and Blood deficiency or Kidney
deficiency (head)
• 
 
Feeling of cold: Cold or Yang deficiency (abdomen or
limbs)
665
• 
 
Burning: Heat or Empty-Heat (epigastrium or limbs)
• 
 
Colicky: Cold or Blood stasis (epigastrium, lower
abdomen)
• 
 
Spastic: Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Qi
stagnation (limbs, abdomen), Liver-Yang rising (head)
• 
 
Distressing: Phlegm or rebellious Qi (chest,
epigastrium)
• 
 
Stuffiness: Spleen deficiency with Heat or Phlegm
(chest, epigastrium)
• 
 
Pushing: severe Qi stagnation (hypochondrium,
epigastrium)
• 
 
Pulling: Liver-Wind (head)
• 
 
Cutting: Blood stasis (lower abdomen)
• 
 
Throbbing: Liver-Yang rising (head)
• 
 
Boring: Blood stasis (head, chest, hypochondrium,
epigastrium, lower abdomen)
• 
 
Lurking: Qi and Blood deficiency or Empty-Cold in
the Interior (abdomen, lower back)
TIME OF PAIN
Daytime pain is usually due to a dysfunction of Qi or Blood.
Pain at night is due to a deficiency of Yin or to Blood stasis.
Intermittent pain is due to either Qi deficiency or Qi stagnation.
Continuous pain is due to Blood stasis.
FACTORS AFFECTING PAIN
The main factors affecting pain are as follows:
 
• 
 
pressure
• 
 
temperature
• 
 
food and drink
• 
 
bowel movement
• 
 
movement and rest.
666
Pressure
Aggravated by pressure
 
This indicates a Full condition (which may
be Dampness, Phlegm, Qi stagnation, Blood stasis or retention of
food). Aggravation by pressure in Full conditions is common in
abdominal pain, stomach ache, menstrual pain and joint pain.
Ameliorated by pressure
 
This indicates Deficiency (e.g.
abdominal pain, stomach ache, menstrual pain and joint pain).
Temperature
Alleviated by warmth
 
If a pain is alleviated by the application of
heat (such as a hot-water bottle) this indicates that it is due to Cold
or Yang deficiency (e.g. backache, joint pain, stomach ache,
abdominal pain and menstrual pain). If a pain is alleviated by hot
weather, this also indicates that it is due to Cold or Yang deficiency
(e.g. backache, joint pain). Similarly if the pain is aggravated by
cold.
Alleviated by cold
 
No pain is generally alleviated by the
application of cold, except in the case of acute joint sprains.
Similarly, no pain is usually alleviated by cold weather.
Food And Drink
Aggravated by eating
 
This indicates a Full condition of the
Stomach.
Ameliorated by eating
 
This indicates an Empty condition of the
Stomach.
Aggravated by drinking cold liquids
 
This indicates a Cold
condition of the Stomach.
Aggravated by drinking hot liquids
 
This indicates a Hot
condition of the Stomach.
Ameliorated by drinking warm liquids
 
This indicates a Cold
condition of the Stomach.
Ameliorated by drinking cold liquids
 
This indicates a Hot
condition of the Stomach.
Bowel Movement
667
Ameliorated by a bowel movement
 
This indicates a Full condition
of the Intestines.
Aggravated by a bowel movement
 
This indicates an Empty
condition of the Intestines or Spleen.
Movement And Rest
Ameliorated by movement
 
This indicates stagnation of Qi (e.g.
abdominal pain) or Cold (e.g. backache).
Aggravated by movement
 
This indicates a deficiency of Qi or
Blood (e.g. backache).
Ameliorated by rest
 
This indicates a deficiency of Qi or Blood
(e.g. backache, joint pain and menstrual pain).
Aggravated by rest
 
This indicates stagnation of Qi (e.g. joint
pain, backache and headache), stasis of Blood (e.g. joint pain,
backache and headache) or Cold (e.g. backache).
Box 29.4
 
summarizes the factors affecting pain.
 
BOX 29.4
 
   
 
FACTORS AFFECTING PAIN
Pressure
• 
 
Worse with pressure: Full condition
• 
 
Better with pressure: Empty condition
Temperature
• 
 
Better with warmth: Cold or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Better with cold: acute joint sprain
Food and drink
• 
 
Worse after eating: Full condition of Stomach
• 
 
Better after eating: Empty condition of Stomach
• 
 
Worse for drinking cold liquids: Cold condition of
Stomach
• 
 
Worse for drinking hot liquids: Heat condition of
Stomach
• 
 
Better for drinking warm liquids: Cold condition of
Stomach
• 
 
Better for drinking cold liquids: Heat condition of
Stomach
668
Bowel movement
• 
 
Better after bowel movement: Full condition of
Intestines
• 
 
Worse after bowel movement: Empty condition of
Intestines or Spleen
Movement and rest
• 
 
Better with movement: Qi stagnation or Cold
• 
 
Worse with movement: Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Better with rest: Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Worse with rest: Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, Cold
ORGAN VERSUS CHANNEL PAIN
Besides the above differentiation, another important one is that
between pain due to involvement of the internal organs with their
respective channels and pain due to involvement of the channels
only. There are four possible situations, listed in 
Box 29.5
 
.
 
BOX 29.5
 
   
 
CLASSIFICATION OF
ORGAN AND CHANNEL PAIN
• 
 
Channel pain deriving from a channel pathology only
• 
 
Organ and channel pain deriving from an organ
pathology
• 
 
Organ pain deriving from organ pathology
• 
 
Channel pain only deriving from organ pathology
Most pains due to sprains, traumas or Painful Obstruction
Syndrome (due to Wind, Cold or Dampness) involve a channel
pathology only. The second possibility is that of an organ
pathology causing a pain in the organ as well as in its related
channel, for example a shoulder pain on the Large Intestine
channel associated with Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine causing
diarrhoea (
Fig. 29.1
 
).
669
FIG. 29.1
 
Derivation of channel pain from channel or organ
pathology
The third possibility is that of an organ pain deriving from an
organ pathology. This is of course a very common situation, for
example abdominal pain from Dampness in the Intestines, chest
pain from Heart-Blood stasis, etc. (
Fig. 29.2
 
).
FIG. 29.2
 
Organ pathology leading to organ pain
The fourth possibility is that of an organ pathology leading only
to a pain in its related channel, for example Damp-Heat in the
Large Intestine manifesting only with pain in the arm along the
Large Intestine channel. This situation, however, is rather rare
(
Fig. 29.3
 
).
FIG. 29.3
 
Organ pathology leading to channel pain
Thus, the two most important diagnostic factors when
confronted with pain are:
Table 29.1
 
tabulates the characteristics of pain from Deficiency,
Fullness, Cold and Heat.
670
Table 29.1
Characteristics of pain from Deficiency, Fullness, Cold and Heat
 
• 
 
whether the pain derives from Deficiency or Fullness
• 
 
whether the pain involves the internal organs and
channels or the channels only.
671
CHAPTER 30
 
FOOD AND
TASTE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
MAIN PATTERNS OF DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
Qi deficiency
Qi stagnation
Qi rebellious
Blood stasis
Dampness
Phlegm
Retention of food
FOOD
APPETITE
Excessive hunger
Aversion to food
Hunger but no desire to eat
TASTE
672
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
BELCHING
SOUR REGURGITATION
INTRODUCTION
The questions regarding reactions to foods, appetite, hunger and
taste are aimed primarily at establishing the state of the Stomach
and Spleen.
WHY
 
WE ASK
We always need to ask about digestive symptoms because the
Stomach and Spleen are the source of Postnatal Qi and therefore a
pathology in these two organs eventually affects other organs.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I always ask about the state of the digestive system before
concluding the interrogation of the patient, unless, of course, the
presenting problem is a digestive one.
HOW
 
WE ASK
It is important to ask about digestive symptoms in detail. It would
not suffice to ask simply “Do you have any digestive complaints?”
We need to ask whether the patient ever experiences any
distension, bloating, fullness, pain, heaviness, hiccup, nausea,
vomiting, belching, loose stools, diarrhoea, etc.
The Stomach and Spleen are the Root of Post-Heaven Qi and
their state affects all the other internal organs; for this reason, it is
always necessary to ask questions to assess their state. This is all
the more important given the frequency of digestive complaints in
Western 
patients. The Stomach controls the rotting and ripening of
food and for this reason it is compared to a bubbling cauldron in
the Middle Burner. The Spleen controls the transformation and
673
transportation (
Yun Hua
 
) of Qi and it therefore affects the
transportation and transformation of food essences in the Middle
Burner. Thus, the Stomach and Spleen together are responsible for
the proper digestion of food. However, in Chinese medicine, the
function of the Stomach and Spleen goes beyond that of digesting
food as, in the process of doing so, they are the source of Food Qi
(
Gu Qi
 
), which, in turn, forms the Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
) and
True Qi (
Zhen Qi
 
). Thus, the Stomach and Spleen are the source of
Post-Heaven Qi and an enquiry into the state of these two organs is
crucial in every case.
The Stomach and Spleen are particularly important also because
they are in the Middle Burner with opposing directions of Qi:
Stomach-Qi descends while Spleen-Qi ascends. A normal
coordination of these two directions of flow is vital for a proper
transformation and transportation of Qi, food essences and fluids;
these two organs are at a crucial crossroads in the Middle Burner
and an impairment of their movement of Qi has immediate
repercussions on Qi, Dampness and Phlegm pathology. In every
pathology of the Stomach and Spleen there is some derangement
of the proper flow of Qi. For example, when Stomach-Qi rebels
upwards rather than descending, it causes symptoms such as
hiccup, nausea, vomiting and belching; even when Stomach-Qi is
deficient it may fail to descend properly and may cause some of
the above symptoms but to a much milder degree. When Spleen-
Qi descends rather than ascends, it may cause loose stools or
diarrhoea.
MAIN PATTERNS OF DIGESTIVE
SYMPTOMS
The main patterns causing digestive symptoms are:
 
• 
 
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Qi rebellious
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Dampness
• 
 
Phlegm
674
• 
 
retention of food.
Qi Deficiency
Qi deficiency of the Spleen causes poor appetite, loose stools and
slight abdominal distension. Qi deficiency of the Stomach causes
poor appetite and slight epigastric discomfort. If there is a pain, it
would be slight, dull and better after eating.
Qi Stagnation
Qi stagnation causes distension, which affects the epigastrium if
the Stomach is primarily involved or the abdomen if the Spleen is
primarily involved. If there is a pain, it would be strongly
associated with distension. “Distension” is usually described as
“bloating” by patients in English-speaking countries.
Qi Rebellious
Qi rebellious of the Stomach causes belching, hiccup, nausea and
vomiting. Qi sinking of the Spleen (i.e. descending rather than
ascending) causes loose stools or diarrhoea.
Blood Stasis
Blood stasis causes intense, fixed, stabbing pain, which is
epigastric in the case of the Stomach, with possible vomiting of
blood, and abdominal in the case of the Spleen, with possibly
blood in the stools.
Dampness
Dampness causes a feeling of fullness and heaviness in the
epigastrium if the Stomach is affected, with a sticky taste and poor
appetite, and in the abdomen if the Spleen is affected.
Phlegm
675
Phlegm causes a feeling of oppression; this usually affects the
epigastrium rather than the abdomen and the Stomach more than
the Spleen. There is also a sticky taste, nausea and poor appetite.
Retention Of Food
Retention of food causes a feeling of fullness in the epigastrium if
the Stomach is affected and in the abdomen if the Spleen is
affected; the latter affects children more 
than adults. In the case of
the Stomach, there may sour regurgitation, nausea and poor
appetite.
Table 30.1
 
illustrates the differentiation of symptoms between
Stomach and Spleen in the various patterns.
Table 30.1
Differentiation of Stomach and Spleen digestive symptoms
according to pattern
Pattern
Stomach
Spleen
Qi
deficiency
Slight epigastric discomfort, dull, slight pain
improved by eating, poor appetite
Poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension, loose stools
Qi
stagnation
Epigastric distension
Abdominal distension
Qi
rebellious
Hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting
Loose stools, diarrhoea
Blood
stasis
Stabbing, fixed epigastric pain, vomiting of blood
Stabbing, fixed abdominal pain,
blood in stools
Dampness
A feeling of fullness and heaviness of the
epigastrium, sticky taste, poor appetite
A feeling of fullness and
heaviness of the abdomen
Phlegm
A feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sticky
taste, nausea, poor appetite
 
Retention
of food
A feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium,
sour regurgitation, nausea, poor appetite
A feeling of fullness and pain of
the abdomen
Thus, the five main sensations experienced in the digestive
system are a feeling of distension, fullness, oppression, stuffiness
and heaviness. 
Table 30.2
 
illustrates the pathology and diagnostic
manifestation of these five sensations.
 
1
676
Table 30.2
Differentiation of sensations of oppression, distension, fullness,
stuffiness and heaviness
FOOD
Especially if the patient complains of digestive symptoms, it is
imperative to ask about the effect of eating on pain. If a digestive
pain is alleviated by eating it means it is of an Empty nature; if it is
aggravated by eating, it is of a Full nature.
Food intolerance or allergies are generally due either to Spleen
deficiency or Stomach-Heat, depending on the reaction: if the
intolerance or allergy manifests with digestive problems and
lethargy it may be due to Spleen-Qi deficiency, while if it manifests
with skin reactions it may be due to Stomach-Heat.
A feeling of distension after eating indicates Qi stagnation; a
feeling of fullness indicates retention of food or Dampness; a
feeling of oppression of the epigastrium indicates Phlegm; a
feeling of stuffiness (a mild feeling of fullness but the epigastrium
is soft on palpation) indicates Heat or Phlegm occurring against a
background of Deficiency. A feeling of heaviness of the
epigastrium indicates the retention of Dampness or Phlegm.
Digestive problems alleviated by the ingestion of warm liquids
or aggravated by cold liquids indicate Cold in the Stomach and
Spleen while if they are aggravated by the ingestion of warm
677
liquids and alleviated by cold liquids it means that they are due to
Stomach-Heat.
Inability to digest fats indicates Gall-Bladder Dampness.
Box 30.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying digestive
symptoms.
 
BOX 30.1
 
   
 
DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
• 
 
Food intolerance: Spleen deficiency or Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Feeling of distension: Qi stagnation
• 
 
Feeling of fullness: retention of Food or Dampness
• 
 
Feeling of oppression: Phlegm
• 
 
Feeling of stuffiness: Deficiency with Heat or Phlegm
• 
 
Feeling of heaviness: Dampness or Phlegm
• 
 
Improvement on drinking warm liquids, aggravation
by cold: Cold in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Improvement on drinking cold liquids, aggravation by
warmth: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Inability to digest fats: Dampness in Gall-Bladder
APPETITE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
A normal appetite is an indication that the Stomach and Spleen
are healthy. For social and historical reasons, lack of appetite is
always considered a bad sign in China and always features as a
prominent symptom in the pattern of Spleen-Qi deficiency. In the
West, lack of appetite is less common and is not usually
considered a very important symptom unless, of course, it leads to
anorexia. Another cultural difference between Western countries
and China is that when Chinese people are under stress they lose
their appetite, whereas in the West patients tend to “pick”
constantly, eat more or eat sweets when under stress.
Lack of appetite indicates usually Spleen-Qi deficiency but it
may also be due to a Fullness and specifically to Dampness
obstructing the Middle Burner; in this case, it will be associated
with a feeling of fullness and of mild nausea.
678
Excessive Hunger
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Excessive hunger usually indicates Stomach-Heat; however,
there is an important exception to this rule. In the West, excessive
hunger leading to constantly “picking” is often a sign of emotional
stress and frustration rather than actual Stomach-Heat.
Excessive hunger without any desire to eat is due either to
Damp-Heat in the Stomach or to Stomach-Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat: Stomach-Heat causes the feeling of hunger, but
Dampness in the first instance or Stomach-Yin deficiency in the
second instance makes the patient reluctant to eat.
Aversion To Food
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
“Aversion to food” is called 
Yan Shi
 
in Chinese and it indicates a
strong aversion to eating and to the smell of food. “Aversion to
food” differs from poor appetite in so far as it implies a strong
disgust of food. This symptom is obviously seen in food poisoning
but, in chronic cases, it may also be seen in retention of food. If
aversion to food is accompanied by a very thick, sticky taste, it is
due to Dampness in the Middle Burner affecting the Liver, Gall-
Bladder, Stomach and Spleen. Aversion to food in pregnancy is due
to the Qi of the Penetrating Vessel rebelling upwards.
Hunger But No Desire To Eat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
This symptom may seem paradoxical but it does occur
occasionally: the patient feels hungry or, more accurately, the
Stomach feels hunger pangs but the patient does not want to
ingest food. This symptom may be due to two causes: Damp-Heat
in the Stomach (the Heat causes hunger but the obstruction of the
Middle Burner by Dampness makes the patient reluctant to eat), or
the pattern of “Stomach strong-Spleen weak” (when a Stomach
Full condition causes hunger and a Spleen deficiency makes the
patient reluctant to eat).
Box 30.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal appetite
679
symptoms.
 
BOX 30.2
 
   
 
APPETITE
Appetite
• 
 
Normal appetite: good state of Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Lack of appetite: Spleen-Qi or Stomach-Qi deficiency
or Dampness in Middle Burner
Excessive hunger
• 
 
Excessive hunger: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Excessive hunger without desire to eat: Damp-Heat in
Stomach or Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Aversion to food
• 
 
Food poisoning
• 
 
Retention of food
• 
 
Dampness in the Middle Burner
• 
 
Rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel (in pregnancy)
Hunger but no desire to eat
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
• 
 
“Stomach strong-Spleen weak” pattern
TASTE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
A normal taste sensation depends primarily on the state of the
Stomach and Spleen and it reflects a healthy state of these two
organs and a normal state of fluids. Thus, a loss of taste sensation
often indicates a deficiency of Spleen and Stomach. Loss of the
sense of taste accompanied by oversecretion of saliva indicates a
deficiency of Stomach and Spleen with retention of Cold in the
Stomach. Loss of taste may also be due to retention of Dampness
in the Middle Burner.
In most cases, a particular taste indicates a Full rather than an
Empty condition of the relevant organ.
680
A bitter taste indicates either Liver-Fire or Heart-Fire; in the
former case, the bitter taste is more or less constant, whereas in
the case of Heart-Fire it will be present only in the morning after a
bad night’s sleep. A bitter taste may also indicate Heat or Damp-
Heat in the Gall-Bladder.
 
• 
 
Bitter taste from Liver-Fire
 
: constant.
• 
 
Bitter taste from Heart-Fire
 
: in the morning after a
bad night’s sleep.
A sweet taste indicates either Spleen deficiency or Damp-Heat.
A sour taste indicates retention of food in the Stomach, a
disharmony of Liver and Stomach, or Liver- and Stomach-Heat.
A salty taste may indicate a Kidney-Yin deficiency or a severe
Kidney-Yang deficiency with fluids rising up to the mouth.
A pungent taste indicates Lung-Heat or Stomach-Heat, or both.
A sticky taste indicates Dampness or Phlegm, usually in the
digestive system.
Western patients are often unable to describe the kind of taste
they experience: very few report a pungent, sour or salty taste for
example. Many patients, when asked, are unable to say whether
they experience a sticky taste or not but quite a few report
experiencing a “metallic” taste; I interpret this as a “sticky” taste.
It is due to Dampness.
Box 30.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying particular tastes.
 
BOX 30.3
 
   
 
TASTE
• 
 
Loss of sense of taste: Stomach and Spleen deficiency,
Dampness in Middle Burner
• 
 
Bitter taste: Liver-Fire or Heart-Fire, Heat or Damp-
Heat in Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Sweet taste: Spleen deficiency or Damp-Heat
• 
 
Sour taste: retention of food in the Stomach,
disharmony of Liver and Stomach, Liver- and Stomach-
Heat
• 
 
Salty taste: Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Pungent taste: Lung-Heat, Stomach-Heat
681
• 
 
Sticky taste: Dampness
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
There are several Chinese terms referring to nausea and
vomiting, expressing varying characteristics or degrees of severity.
The Chinese term 
E Xin
 
means “nausea”, 
Ou
 
means vomiting
accompanied by a sound, 
Tu
 
means vomiting without sound, 
Gan
ou
 
indicates short retching with a low sound, and 
Yue
 
indicates
long retching with a loud sound (before the Ming dynasty this
term indicated “hiccup”). The two Chinese terms 
Ou
 
and 
Tu
 
are
usually used together to indicate vomiting.
Stomach-Qi normally descends; if it ascends it may cause nausea
or vomiting, or both. Thus, nausea and vomiting are by definition
due to rebellious Stomach-Qi ascending; this is not to say, however,
that they are always due to a Full condition as nausea and vomiting
may also be due to a Stomach deficiency. The pathological
mechanism is different in each case: in Full conditions of the
Stomach, Stomach-Qi rebels upwards 
actively
 
, whereas in Empty
conditions it fails to descend. Therefore, although nausea and
vomiting always involve rebellious Stomach-Qi, this will be
combined with various Stomach pathologies of the Full or Empty
type such as Stomach-Cold, Stomach-Heat, Stomach-Yin deficiency,
etc. This different patho-logical mechanism explains the different
action of the two points Ren-13 Shangwan and Ren-10 Xiawan: the
former actively subdues rebellious Stomach-Qi, whereas the latter
helps Stomach-Qi to descend.
 
• 
 
In nausea and vomiting from Full conditions,
Stomach-Qi 
rebels upwards
 
(Ren-13 Shangwan).
• 
 
In nausea and vomiting from Empty conditions,
Stomach-Qi 
fails to descend
 
(Ren-10 Xiawan).
A mild feeling of nausea is usually due to a deficiency of
682
Stomach-Qi, with Stomach-Qi unable to descend. A strong feeling
of nausea and vomiting is due to rebellious Stomach-Qi ascending;
this may be associated with stagnation, Cold or Heat.
Profuse and loud vomiting of food soon after eating indicates a
Full condition of the Stomach; vomiting of fluids with a low sound
some time after eating indicates an Empty condition of the
Stomach.
Vomiting of sour fluids indicates stagnant Liver-Qi invading the
Stomach. Vomiting of bitter fluids indicates Heat in the Liver and
Gall-Bladder. Vomiting of thin, watery fluids indicates Cold in the
Stomach. Vomiting soon after eating suggests a Heat condition
while vomiting some hours after eating suggests a Cold or Empty
condition.
Box 30.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying nausea and
vomiting.
 
BOX 30.4
 
   
 
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
• 
 
Mild nausea: Stomach-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Severe nausea/vomiting: rebellious Stomach-Qi
• 
 
Vomiting soon after eating: Stomach Full condition
• 
 
Vomiting of fluids: Stomach Empty condition
• 
 
Vomiting of sour fluids: stagnant Liver-Qi invading
the Stomach
• 
 
Vomiting of bitter fluids: Heat in the Liver and Gall-
Bladder
• 
 
Vomiting of thin, watery fluids: Cold in the Stomach
• 
 
Vomiting immediately after eating: Heat
• 
 
Vomiting some hours after eating: Cold or Empty
condition
BELCHING
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Belching always indicates Stomach-Qi rebelling upwards. This
may be due to a purely Full condition, in which case the belching
is violent and loud, or it may be due to Deficiency, in which case
683
the belching is mild and with a low sound.
The most common cause of belching is Liver-Qi invading the
Stomach and causing Stomach-Qi to rebel upwards; this is
accompanied by epigastric and hypochondrial distension.
Retention of food (common in children) may also cause
belching, in which case it is accompanied by sour regurgitation
and epigastric fullness.
Deficient causes of belching include Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency and Stomach-Yin deficiency; in these cases the belching
is mild and its sound is weak.
Box 30.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying belching.
 
BOX 30.5
 
   
 
BELCHING
• 
 
Loud belching: Full condition
• 
 
Quiet belching: Empty condition (Stomach-Qi or
Stomach-Yin deficiency)
• 
 
With distension: stagnant Liver-Qi invading the
Stomach
• 
 
With sour regurgitation: retention of food
SOUR REGURGITATION
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Sour regurgitation describes an acidy feeling in the oesophagus
which comes up into the mouth. Like belching, it is also a form of
rebellious Stomach-Qi. The most common cause is Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach and causing Stomach-Qi to rebel upwards.
Retention of food is another possible cause of sour
regurgitation. Other causes include Dampness in the Stomach,
which may be associated with Heat or with Cold.
Box 30.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying sour regurgitation.
 
BOX 30.6
 
   
 
SOUR REGURGITATION
• 
 
With acidity rising: stagnant Liver-Qi invading the
Stomach
• 
 
With feeling of fullness: retention of food or
Dampness in the Stomach
684
NOTES
1. 
Examples of formulae for the above sensations are Ban Xia
Hou Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
 
for the sensation
of oppression, Chai Hu Shu Gan Tang 
Bupleurum Soothing
the Liver Decoction
 
for the feeling of distension, Bao He Wan
Preserving and Harmonizing Pill
 
for the feeling of fullness
(purgation is indicated), Ban Xia Xie Xin Tang 
Pinellia
Draining the Heart Decoction
 
for the feeling of stuffiness
and Huo Po Xia Ling Tang 
Agastache-Magnolia-Pinellia-
Poria Decoction
 
for the feeling of heaviness. The
acupuncture extra point Pigen is indicated for the feeling
of stuffiness and disharmony of Liver and Spleen. This
point is located on the lower back, 3. 5 
cun
 
from the
midline, lateral to the inferior border of the spinous
process of L1 (i. e. level with BL-22 Sanjiaoshu)
685
CHAPTER 31
 
STOOLS AND
URINE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
STOOLS
Frequency
Consistency
Shape
Colour
Odour and sounds
Abdominal pain related to evacuation
URINE
Frequency
Colour
Amount
Difficulty in micturition
Cloudiness
686
Incontinence
Urination at night
Pain
Smell
INTRODUCTION
The bowel movement and urination reflect primarily the state of
the Yang organs and specifically the Large Intestine, Small
Intestine and Bladder. Apart from these organs, other ones also
influence defecation and urination: in particular, the Spleen, Liver
and Kidneys influence defecation while the Kidneys, Liver, Spleen
and Triple Burner influence urination. Defecation and urination
generally reflect the state of organs in the Lower Burner and in
particular the transportation, transformation and excretion of
fluids in the Lower Burner, which is under the control of the Triple
Burner.
WHY
 
WE ASK
Questions about bowel movement and urination are important
and should always be asked: apart from telling us about the state
of the digestive and urinary systems themselves, they serve to
establish the Full or Empty and Hot or Cold nature of the
condition.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Unless the presenting problem concerns the functions of urination
and defecation, I generally ask about these towards the end of the
consultation.
HOW
 
WE ASK
687
When asking about urination and defecation it is important to be
specific: asking “Are your bowels regular?” may elicit a positive
response when the 
patient means that he or she evacuates the
bowels once every 3 days 
regularly
 
. Similarly, if we ask whether the
urination is “frequent” (by which we mean “too frequent”) the
patient might answer affirmatively when it is normal. We should
therefore ask precisely how many times patients evacuate their
bowels and how many times they urinate in a day (bearing in mind
seasonal variations, as urination is generally less frequent in
summertime).
As for urination, we should also bear in mind differences
between men and women as women have a large bladder and need
to urinate less frequently than men. An added difficulty in most
Western countries is that many people force themselves to drink a
lot of water in the mistaken belief that it flushes the kidneys; this
means that the urination will be much more frequent than normal
and that the colour of the urine will be paler, making diagnosing
from urination more difficult.
STOOLS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Hearing and Smelling
 
, 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 72
When asking about stools we should ask about the following
aspects systematically:
 
• 
 
frequency
• 
 
consistency
• 
 
shape
• 
 
colour
• 
 
odour and sounds
• 
 
abdominal pain related to evacuation.
The bowel movement is an important indicator of the state of
the digestive system and specifically of the Large Intestine and
Stomach. These two organs are connected within the Bright-Yang
system and their pathology is often interconnected. For example,
688
Heat in the Stomach is easily transmitted to the Large Intestine;
Stomach-Qi failing to descend may cause constipation, etc.
However, other organs also play a role in defecation and especially
the Liver, which should assist defecation with its free flow of Qi,
the Kidneys, which control the two lower Yin orifices (i.e. the
urethra and anus), and the Spleen, which controls the
transportation of Qi.
The normal bowel movement should occur at least once a day.
The stools should be formed, and not too hard, not dry, and
without excessive smell. Evacuation should be easy and effortless.
 
The Large Intestine, Small Intestine, Stomach, Spleen,
Liver, Kidneys and Triple Burner all affect defecation.
Frequency
A normal bowel movement is once or twice a day. Any evacuation
that occurs with less frequency than this constitutes constipation.
A bowel movement (which may or may not be loose) occurring
more than three times a day is considered to be too frequent.
Constipation is the most common disturbance of frequency of
evacuation but its clinical significance cannot be separated from
the consistency of the stools. Constipation indicates not only the
infrequent passage of stools, but also excessive dryness of the
stools or difficulty and straining in passing stools.
Acute constipation with thirst and yellow tongue coating
indicates acute Heat in the Stomach and Intestines.
Chronic constipation in old people or women may be due to
Blood or Kidney deficiency; in this case the stools would be
slightly dry and there would be other signs of Blood or Kidney
deficiency.
If the stools are bitty, small and difficult to pass, this indicates
Liver-Qi stagnation or Heat in the Intestines (if they are also dry);
when it is due to Liver-Qi stagnation, it often alternates with
diarrhoea or loose stools as so often happens in irritable bowel
syndrome.
Constipation with dry stools indicates Heat in the Large
689
Intestine or Yin deficiency and Dryness of the Stomach, Intestines
or Kidneys. If there is difficulty in evacuation but the stools are not
dry, this indicates Liver-Qi stagnation.
Constipation with abdominal pain that is relieved by the bowel
movement indicates retention of food or Dampness in the
Intestines; constipation with abdominal pain and distension that
is not relieved by the bowel movement indicates Liver-Qi
stagnation. Constipation with abdominal pain and a pronounced
feeling of cold indicates Cold in the Intestines.
Spleen-Qi deficiency normally causes loose stools but in a few
cases a severe Spleen-Qi deficiency may cause constipation
because the deficient Spleen-Qi fails 
to move and transport.
Constipation may also be caused by a so-called “shut-down” of the
Qi mechanism; this happens when there is an impairment of the
ascending and descending of Qi in the digestive system, which
may be seen, for example, after surgery.
Alternation of constipation and loose stools indicates stagnant
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen.
If the stools are not loose but very frequent and the person
cannot hold them easily, this indicates deficiency of the Central Qi,
that is, the Qi of Stomach and Spleen; it also indicates sinking of
Spleen-Qi.
Box 31.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying constipation and
increased frequency.
 
BOX 31.1
 
   
 
CONSTIPATION
• 
 
Acute constipation with yellow tongue coating: Heat
in Intestines
• 
 
Chronic constipation in women: Blood or Kidney
deficiency
• 
 
Constipation with dry stools: Heat in the Intestines or
Yin deficiency and Dryness
• 
 
Small, bitty stools, difficult to pass: Liver-Qi
stagnation, Heat in the Intestines
• 
 
Difficulty in evacuation, stools not dry: Liver-Qi
stagnation
• 
 
Constipation relieved by bowel movement: retention
of food, Dampness in Intestines
• 
 
Constipation with abdominal pain and distension:
690
Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Constipation with colicky abdominal pain: Cold in the
Intestines
• 
 
Alternation of constipation and loose stools: stagnant
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
• 
 
Frequent but not loose stools: Spleen-Qi sinking or
deficiency of Central Qi
Consistency
The normal stool is well formed, not loose, not too dry and
floating.
An excessively dry stool indicates either Heat in the Intestines,
Blood deficiency (of the Liver) or Yin deficiency (which may affect
the Large Intestine, Spleen, Liver or Kidneys).
Loose stools generally indicate a deficiency of the Spleen or
Kidneys, or both. A deficiency of the Spleen is by far the most
common cause of chronic diarrhoea or loose stools; a Kidney
deficiency is a common cause of chronic diarrhoea in the elderly. If
the diarrhoea is severe and very watery, this usually indicates Yang
deficiency (of the Spleen and/or Kidneys, or both), whereas loose
stools usually indicate Spleen-Qi deficiency.
The most common cause of chronic diarrhoea is Spleen-Qi or
Spleen-Yang deficiency. Chronic, watery diarrhoea occurring every
day in the very early morning is due to Kidney-Yang deficiency and
is called “cock-crow diarrhoea” or “fifth-hour diarrhoea” (this
refers to the ancient Chinese way of measuring time in each 24
hours).
There are, however, also Full causes of diarrhoea and principally
Dampness (which could be associated with Heat or Cold) and Cold
in the Spleen and Intestines.
The presence of a foul smell with the diarrhoea or loose stools
suggests Heat in the Intestines, whereas the absence of smell is
either normal or suggestive of Cold.
The presence of pain with the diarrhoea or loose stools suggests
Liver-Qi stagnation, Cold or Damp-Heat.
691
The presence of mucus in the stools indicates Dampness while
the presence of blood indicates deficient Spleen-Qi not holding
Blood, Damp-Heat or Blood stasis in the Intestines. Acute
diarrhoea or loose stools are usually due to invasion of external
Dampness, which may be seen in food poisoning; with a foul smell
it is due to Damp-Heat, without smell to Damp-Cold.
Undigested food in the stools, stools following blood or
diarrhoea with borborygmi indicates Spleen-Qi deficiency; a
burning sensation of the anus indicates Damp-Heat in the
Intestines.
Sticky stools that necessitate brushing the toilet with a toilet
brush every time indicate Dampness in the Intestines.
Case history 31.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying diarrhoea.
 
Case History 31.1
A 25-year-old woman had been suffering from
ulcerative colitis for 1 year, after the break-up of a
relationship. Her main symptom was diarrhoea with
blood and mucus in the stools but without pain. At the
time of her consultation, she was taking oral
prednisone.
Apart from this she had no other symptoms except
that her periods had not yet returned since stopping
the contraceptive pill a year and a half previously. Her
complexion was dull yellow and her skin was quite
greasy.
Her tongue was slightly Pale with a sticky yellow
coating and her pulse was Weak on the right and
noticeably Wiry on both Rear positions.
Diagnosis:
 
The abdominal symptoms of diarrhoea
with mucus and blood and the sticky coating on the
tongue clearly indicate Damp-Heat in the Intestines, in
this case occurring against a background of Spleen-Qi
deficiency as shown by the Pale tongue and the Weak
pulse on the right. In intestinal diseases such as
ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease, the pulse is
frequently Wiry on both Rear positions.
692
Box 31.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying loose stools and
diarrhoea.
 
BOX 31.2
 
   
 
LOOSE
STOOLS/DIARRHOEA
• 
 
Dry stools: Heat in Intestines, Blood deficiency, Yin
deficiency
• 
 
Loose stools: Spleen-Qi, Spleen-Yang or Kidney
deficiency
• 
 
Chronic diarrhoea: Spleen/Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Chronic, watery diarrhoea in the early morning:
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Diarrhoea with foul smell: Heat in the Intestines
• 
 
Diarrhoea with pain: Liver-Qi stagnation Cold or
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Diarrhoea with mucus: Dampness in the Intestines
• 
 
Diarrhoea with blood: Damp-Heat or Spleen-Qi
deficiency
• 
 
Acute diarrhoea: external Dampness
• 
 
Undigested food in the stools: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Mucus in stools: Dampness in Intestines
• 
 
Burning sensation in the anus: Damp-Heat in the
Intestines
• 
 
Black or dark stools: Blood stasis
• 
 
Blood before stools: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Stools before blood: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Diarrhoea with borborygmi: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Sticky stools: Dampness in Intestine
Shape
Stools like small pellets indicate Liver-Qi stagnation, or Heat if
they are also dry. Long and thin stools like pencils indicate Spleen-
Qi deficiency (bear in mind that they could also indicate carcinoma
of the bowel) (
Fig. 31.1
 
).
693
FIG. 31.1
 
Normal stools, stools like pellets and thin-long stools
(Reproduced with permission from Maciocia G 1994 The Practice of Chinese Medicine,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
Colour
Normal stools are light-brown in colour. Pale-yellow stools indicate
Empty-Heat (of the Spleen, Large Intestine or Kidneys). Dark-
yellow stools indicate Full-Heat (of the Large Intestine). Dark
stools may indicate the presence of occult blood and they generally
indicate Heat (of the Large Intestine). Pale, almost white stools
indicate Cold in the Large Intestine. Green stools indicate Liver-Qi
invading the Spleen. Red stools indicate the presence of fresh
blood and this may be due either to Heat in the Large Intestine or
to Spleen-Qi deficiency. Greenish-bluish stools indicate the
penetration of external Cold into the Large Intestine (common in
babies).
Black or very dark stools indicate Blood stasis. Bright-red blood
coming before the stools and splashing 
in all directions indicates
Damp-Heat in the Intestines. If the blood comes before the stools
and is turbid and the anus feels heavy and painful, this indicates
Blood-Heat. If the stools come before the blood and this is watery,
it indicates that Spleen-Qi is deficient and is unable to hold Blood.
Box 31.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying stool colours.
 
BOX 31.3
 
   
 
COLOUR OF STOOLS
• 
 
Light brown: normal
694
• 
 
Pale yellow: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Dark yellow: Full-Heat
• 
 
Dark: Heat
• 
 
Pale: Cold
• 
 
Green: Liver-Qi invading Spleen
• 
 
Red: Large Intestine Heat or Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Greenish-bluish: Cold in Large Intestine
• 
 
Very dark, black: Blood stasis
• 
 
Bright-red blood before stools: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Turbid blood before stools: Blood-Heat
• 
 
Stools before watery blood: Spleen-Qi deficiency
Odour And Sounds
Hearing and Smelling,
 
Chapters 53
 
and 
54
Generally speaking, an absence of smell is either normal or it
indicates Cold in the Intestines. A strong, foul smell usually
indicates Heat and especially Damp-Heat. A sour smell indicates a
disharmony of Liver and Spleen.
Flatulence may be due to Liver-Qi stagnation, to Damp-Heat if
there is a foul smell, or to Spleen-Qi deficiency if there is no smell.
Borborygmi with loose stools indicate Spleen deficiency;
borborygmi with abdominal distension and without loose stools
indicate stagnation of Liver-Qi.
Box 31.4
 
summarizes patterns underlying odour and sounds.
 
BOX 31.4
 
   
 
ODOUR OF SOUNDS
• 
 
Absence of smell: Cold in the Intestines (or normal)
• 
 
Strong, foul smell: Heat or Damp-Heat
• 
 
Sour smell: disharmony of Liver and Spleen
• 
 
Flatulence: Liver-Qi stagnation, Damp-Heat (if foul
smell), Spleen-Qi deficiency (no smell)
• 
 
Borborygmi: Spleen-Qi deficiency (with loose stools),
Liver-Qi stagnation (with abdominal distension)
695
Abdominal Pain Related To Evacuation
The feeling of distension before evacuation indicates Liver-Qi
stagnation. Abdominal pain before evacuation but not relieved by
it also indicates Liver-Qi stagnation. Abdominal pain during
evacuation (and generally relieved by it) indicates Dampness in
the Large Intestine or retention of food. Abdominal pain during
evacuation, which is not relieved by it, generally indicates Cold in
the Large Intestine. Abdominal pain after evacuation is normally
due to Spleen-Qi deficiency.
Case history 31.2
 
illustrates a pattern underlying constipation
with pain.
 
Case History 31.2
A 22-year-old woman had been suffering from
constipation and abdominal distension and pain for the
past 2 years; the abdominal pain was alleviated by the
bowel movement. Her complexion was dull, pale and
sallow. She also complained of a gradual hair loss on
the top of the head, dizziness and itchy skin.
She had been on the contraceptive pill for a long
time, having come off it the previous year; her periods
failed to return after stopping the contraceptive pill and
were only recently beginning to return, albeit with an
irregular cycle.
Her tongue was slightly Red on the sides and had a
fairly thick, sticky yellow coating and her pulse was
Slippery and slightly Wiry.
Diagnosis:
 
This case history is reported here mostly
as an example of the importance of the pulse and
tongue in diagnosis. In fact, her presenting symptoms
clearly reflect Liver-Blood deficiency (gradual loss of
hair on top, dizziness, dull, sallow complexion, itchy
skin, irregular periods) and Liver-Qi stagnation
(abdominal distension and pain). However, the tongue
and pulse introduce a completely different dimension
to this case history as they clearly reveal the presence of
Damp-Heat manifested by the redness on the sides of
the tongue and sticky yellow coating and by the
696
Slippery quality of the pulse (the pulse is also slightly
Wiry due to Liver-Qi stagnation) (
Fig. 31.2
 
).
FIG. 31.2
 
Determining the importance of the tongue in
diagnosis
The condition of Damp-Heat revealed by the pulse
and tongue adds to and partially corrects the initial
diagnosis: in fact, the alleviation of the abdominal pain
after the bowel movement confirms the presence of
Damp-Heat which is a “solid” pathogenic factor that is,
so to speak, “expelled” by the bowel movement. In
contrast, abdominal pain due to Liver-Qi stagnation
does not usually improve with bowel movement.
The pulse and tongue led me to ask further
questions, which I would not have otherwise asked, to
confirm or exclude the presence of Damp-Heat: on
questioning she did confirm that the abdominal pain
was accompanied by a pronounced feeling of fullness
and heaviness, which are typical of Dampness.
Box 31.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying abdominal pain.
 
BOX 31.5
 
   
 
ABDOMINAL PAIN
• 
 
Before evacuation: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
During evacuation: Dampness in the Large Intestine
or retention of food (relieved by it), Cold in the Large
Intestine (not relieved by it)
697
• 
 
After evacuation: Spleen-Qi deficiency
URINE
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Hearing and Smelling
 
, 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 73
With regard to urination we should ask about the following
aspects systematically:
 
• 
 
frequency
• 
 
colour
• 
 
amount
• 
 
difficulty in micturition
• 
 
cloudiness
• 
 
incontinence
• 
 
urination at night
• 
 
pain
• 
 
smell.
The urination gives a good indication of the Hot or Cold nature
of the condition and also of the state of Kidneys and Bladder.
Frequency
As a general principle, enuresis or incontinence of urine is usually
due to Deficiency conditions whereas retention of urine is
generally due to a Full condition, but there are exceptions to this
rule. For example, severe Qi deficiency of the Lungs and Spleen in
the elderly may lead to urine retention.
Frequent urination is generally due to Kidney-Yang deficiency, in
which case the urine is pale and abundant; if it is frequent but
scanty it indicates Spleen- and Kidney-Qi deficiency.
Nocturnal enuresis in children is due either to a constitutional
Kidney deficiency or to Liver-Fire; in the first instance the child
will be quiet and listless, while in the case of Liver-Fire the child
698
will be vivacious and prone to fits of anger.
Colour
The colour of the urine gives a good indication of the Hot and Cold
condition of the patient. Normal urine is pale yellow. Pale urine
indicates Cold in the Bladder or Kidney-Yang deficiency; dark
urine indicates Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency. It
should be remembered that the colour of the urine is affected
when the person drinks a lot of water (becoming paler than it
would otherwise be) and also when the person takes vitamin B,
which makes the urine bright yellow.
Blood in the urine indicates either Qi deficiency (of the Spleen
and Kidneys), Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Very dark urine, like soya sauce, indicates a kidney disease such
as kidney failure or glomerulonephritis.
Box 31.6
 
summarizes patterns underlying urine colours.
 
BOX 31.6
 
   
 
COLOUR OF URINE
• 
 
Pale: Cold in the Bladder or Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Dark: Heat in the Bladder or Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Red (with blood): Qi deficiency, Heat in the Bladder or
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Amount
Copious urination indicates Kidney-Yang deficiency; scanty
urination indicates Kidney-Yin deficiency or Heat in the Bladder
unless it is due to profuse sweating, repeated vomiting or severe
diarrhoea. If the urination is scanty but also frequent, it is
normally due to Spleen- and Kidney-Qi deficiency. Copious, clear
and pale urination during an exterior invasion of Wind indicates
that the pathogenic factor has not penetrated into the Interior (if it
had, the urine would be dark).
Difficulty In Micturition
699
Retention of urine from Full patterns may be due to Dampness
obstructing the urinary passages, to Blood stasis in the Bladder or
to urinary stones. Retention of urine from Empty patterns may be
due to Kidney-Yang deficiency, Kidney-Yin deficiency or a
deficiency of the Lungs; all these patterns occur mostly in the
elderly.
Difficulty in urination (meaning that the micturition is difficult
or that it may stop and start) is usually due to Dampness
obstructing the urinary passages; a slight difficulty in urination
may also be due to Spleen- and Kidney-Qi deficiency. In the elderly,
it may be due to Kidney-Yang deficiency; in rare cases, it may be
due to Lung-Qi deficiency.
Cloudiness
Turbid urine indicates Dampness in the urinary passages. Urine
with small flakes of mucus indicates Damp-Heat in the Bladder.
Incontinence
Incontinence of urine is always due to a deficiency of the Kidneys
and sinking of Kidney-Qi; it is common in the elderly and in
women after childbirth or after a hysterectomy.
Dribbling of urine after urination indicates the Kidney-Qi is not
firm.
Urination At Night
Urinating at night indicates Kidney-Yang deficiency. This is due to
deficient Yang not controlling Yin at night and therefore fluids
leaking out in urination.
 
Remember
 
: urination at night is caused by a deficiency
of Kidney-Yang, rather than Kidney-Yin.
Pain
Pain and hypogastric distension before urination indicate Liver-Qi
700
stagnation; burning pain during urination indicates Damp-Heat in
the Bladder; a dull ache after urination indicates Kidney-Qi
deficiency.
Smell
Absence of smell is either normal or indicates Cold in the Bladder;
a strong smell indicates Damp-Heat in the Bladder. A sweet smell
of the urine may indicate diabetes.
701
CHAPTER 32
 
THIRST AND
DRINK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THIRST
DRY MOUTH
PREFERENCE FOR HOT OR COLD DRINKS
ABSENCE OF THIRST
INTRODUCTION
 
WHY
 
WE ASK
The symptom of thirst (or its absence) reflects the state of the
Body Fluids. There are two types of fluid, one called 
Jin
 
, the other
called 
Ye
 
. The 
Jin
 
fluids are clear, light and watery and they
circulate with the Defensive Qi in the space between skin and
muscles; sweat comes from these fluids. The 
Ye
 
fluids are more
dense and heavy and they moisten and lubricate the joint spaces
702
and the sense organs. Saliva is an expression of these 
Ye
 
fluids;
dryness of the mouth or thirst (these are not the same thing) are
therefore symptoms of deficiency of such fluids, either because
they are burned by Heat or Empty-Heat, or because there is not
enough Yin.
The organ involved most closely with thirst and dry mouth is the
Stomach but the Kidneys also exert an influence on saliva.
However, Heat or Empty-Heat of any organ may cause thirst or a
dry mouth.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
During the time I have been practising, I have never had a patient
seek treatment for a problem related to thirst (although in China
patients recognize problems related to thirst as being indicative of
an imbalance that needs to be treated). However, I will ask almost
every patient I see whether they feel particularly thirst, have a dry
mouth, etc. I usually do this after I have asked about food and
appetite, or when I am trying to establish the Hot or Cold nature
of a condition.
I specifically ask about thirst in conditions where a patient has
apparent 
symptoms
 
of Heat but I suspect 
does not actually have
Heat. For example, in cases of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating
Vessel, a woman may have a feeling of heat of the face and a red
face, but no thirst because there is no actual Heat.
HOW
 
WE ASK
For cultural reasons, thirst and dry mouth are two symptoms
Chinese patients are very aware of; whereas Western patients are
somewhat less aware of these symptoms and seldom report them
spontaneously. An added difficulty in the West is that more and
more people force themselves to drink very frequently in the
mistaken belief that this is a beneficial habit that ‘flushes the
kidneys’. As a result of this habit, such people will seldom feel
thirsty even if they suffer from Heat. An added difficulty in
England is that tea consumption is very high and this would also
stop people from feeling thirsty. The same applies to countries
703
where coffee consumption is high. In the USA, people tend also to
drink a lot in general (including water and soda). As a result of
these factors, fewer patients will report feeling thirsty than is the
case in China even though they do suffer from Heat.
Generally speaking, the preference for hot or cold drinks reflects
a condition of Cold or Heat of the Stomach respectively. However,
this diagnostic symptom may be rendered invalid by cultural
habits in Western countries and especially in the USA, where the
consumption of iced drinks is very widespread.
THIRST
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 70
Generally speaking, thirst indicates Heat, which may be either
Full- or Empty-Heat. Thirst is not the same as dry mouth, as the
former usually reflects Heat whereas the latter reflects Yin
deficiency.
Full-Heat causes intense thirst with desire to drink cold fluids.
Full Heat of any organ can cause this symptom, but especially
Stomach-Heat, Lung-Heat, Liver-Fire and Heart-Fire.
Empty-Heat causes thirst with desire to drink in small sips,
especially in the evening or during the night. This symptom is
caused particularly by Empty- Heat of the Stomach, Lungs,
Kidneys and Heart.
A particular symptom in Chinese diagnosis is that of ‘thirst
without desire to drink’. This particular symptom may seem
strange but it does occur and Western patients do occasionally
report it even spontaneously. Damp-Heat causes thirst but without
the desire to drink; this is because Heat causes the thirst but
Dampness, obstructing the Middle Burner, makes the patient
reluctant to drink.
Thirst with a desire to drink but immediately followed by the
vomiting of fluids indicates Phlegm-Heat.
In rare cases, a mild thirst with a desire to sip fluids may be due
to severe, chronic Qi deficiency; this is due to the deficient Qi not
transporting the fluids to the mouth and causing thirst.
Intense thirst with profuse urination may indicate diabetes
(
Case history 32.1
 
).
704
 
Case History 32.1
A 50-year-old woman had been suffering from type-II,
late-onset diabetes which had been diagnosed only 7
weeks before. The first manifestations of it were thirst,
frequent urination, vaginal itching and irritation and
extreme tiredness. The onset of the diabetes coincided
with the stopping of her periods, during which time she
suffered from hot flushes, night sweating, urination at
night, disturbed sleep, dry eyes and throat at night with
desire to sip water and what she described as ‘a feeling
of adrenaline rushing up and around the chest’. She
was overweight, her voice was quite loud and she was
generally lively. Her complexion was quite flushed.
Diagnosis:
 
The red complexion and the symptoms
she developed after the stoppage of her periods clearly
indicate Heat or Empty-Heat. However, this case is an
example of a striking contradiction between the
symptoms and the tongue: in fact, her tongue was Pale
and Swollen. In order to confirm or exclude the
presence of Cold or Yang deficiency as manifested by
the tongue, I asked about cold feeling and she did
confirm that, although she felt hot at night, she also
experienced very cold feet and needed to wear socks in
bed. This contradiction is very common especially in
women of menopausal age and it simply indicates that
there is a deficiency of both Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang. The deficiency of the Kidneys was also confirmed
by the fact that she suffered 
from chronic lower
backache; the symptom of frequent urination
experienced with the onset of her diabetes also
confirms the Kidney deficiency and it is not by chance
that the diabetes developed when her periods stopped
and the Kidney energy declined.
Her pulse was Deep, slightly Slippery, Weak on both
Rear positions and relatively Overflowing on the Heart
position. The Deep and Weak pulse on both Rear
positions confirms the Kidney deficiency, while the
Slippery quality indicates the presence of Phlegm which
705
is confirmed by her being overweight. The relatively
Overflowing quality of the Heart pulse is common in
menopausal women and, rather than indicating an
actual Heart pattern, it reflects a rising of Qi towards
the top of the body due to the deficiency of the Kidneys
below. It is this rising of Qi that causes the hot flushes
and in her case, also the peculiar symptom of ‘a feeling
of adrenaline rushing up and around the chest’.
The treatment principle in this case is to tonify the
Kidneys, strengthen the Penetrating and Directing
Vessels, tonify the Spleen and resolve Phlegm.
DRY MOUTH
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 70
Yin deficiency causes a dry mouth, rather than thirst, especially
in the afternoon or evening; also in this case the patient likes to
drink in small sips.
Although not common, a dry mouth may also be due to severe,
chronic Blood stasis, in which case there would also be a desire to
gargle with fluids without swallowing.
 
A dry mouth may be caused by Yin deficiency, rather
than Heat. In this case, it would get worse in the
afternoon and evening.
PREFERENCE FOR HOT OR COLD
DRINKS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 70
A patient’s preference for hot or cold drinks reflects the Cold or
Hot nature of their condition, especially with regard to the
Stomach. Stomach-Cold will cause a patient to prefer warm drinks,
while Stomach-Heat will cause a patient to desire cold drinks.
706
A desire to drink warm or hot liquids does not count as ‘thirst’
and it indicates a Cold pattern of the Stomach, which may include
also Cold-Dampness.
ABSENCE OF THIRST
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 70
Although ‘absence of thirst’ is not a symptom as such, it is
considered in Chinese medicine because it has a particular
diagnostic significance. Absence of thirst, that is, if the patient
feels seldom thirsty and never has the desire to drink, indicates a
Cold pattern. Obviously, this symptom is elicited on interrogation
as a patient will not normally report it spontaneously.
Box 32.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying thirst.
 
BOX 32.1
 
   
 
THIRST
• 
 
Thirst: Heat
• 
 
Dry mouth: Yin deficiency
• 
 
Thirst with desire to drink cold fluids: Full-Heat
• 
 
Thirst with desire to drink in small sips: Empty-Heat
• 
 
Thirst with no desire to drink: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Thirst with desire to drink, immediately followed by
vomiting of fluids: Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Mild thirst with a desire to sip fluids: Qi deficiency
• 
 
Dry mouth with desire to gargle: Blood stasis
• 
 
Desire to drink warm liquids: Stomach-Cold
• 
 
Desire to drink cold liquids: Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Absence of thirst: Cold
• 
 
Intense thirst with profuse urination: Diabetes
707
CHAPTER 33
 
ENERGY LEVELS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
PATTERNS CAUSING TIREDNESS
INTRODUCTION
This is not one of the traditional 10 questions of Chinese
diagnosis. I have added it to the list of questions because tiredness
is one of the most common symptoms reported by Western
patients. In my practice, about 12% of patients seek treatment
specifically and only for tiredness; and to these should be added
all the other patients who come for other symptoms or diseases
but who also suffer from chronic tiredness.
WHY
 
WE ASK
It is always essential to ask about level of energy and tiredness
because it is such a common complaint: indeed, it is often the
main reason that patients seek treatment.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
708
I generally ask about tiredness quite early during the interrogation
and as soon as I suspect a Deficiency pattern.
HOW
 
WE ASK
This is generally quite straightforward and I usually ask whether
they ‘feel unusually tired’ or whether they ‘lack energy’. However,
when enquiring about tiredness, it is very important to enquire
about the patient’s lifestyle. Many people have unrealistic
expectations about their level of energy. If people in industrialized
societies work too much and for far too long, a feeling of tiredness
is entirely normal. For example, it is not uncommon for 
someone
to get up at 6 am, leave home at 6.30 to catch a train, work the
whole day under hectic conditions (having a sandwich at the desk
for ‘lunch’) and return home at 9 in the evening; such a schedule is
precisely what constitutes ‘overwork’ in Chinese medicine.
Our level of energy depends also on age. Again, very many
people have unrealistic expectations about their desired level of
energy and are surprised that they cannot do at 55 what they did
when they were 25.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
There is no Chinese disease-symptom category called ‘tiredness’
but there is one called ‘exhaustion’ (
Xu Lao
 
or 
Xu Sun
 
). The term
Xu Lao
 
describes not only a symptom, that is, ‘tiredness’ (
Lao
 
) but
also its pathology, that is, a deficiency of the body’s Qi (
xu
 
). The
term 
Xu Lao
 
was introduced in the ‘Prescriptions from the Golden
Cabinet’ for the first time. It says in 
Chapter 6
 
: ‘
 
When the pulse is
big but empty in male patients, it indicates extreme exhaustion from
over-exertion
 
.’
 
1
The ‘Discussion on the Causes and Symptoms of Diseases’ (
Zhu
Bing Yuan Hou Lun
 
, 
AD
 
610) by Chao Yuan Fang elaborates on the
concept of exhaustion by investigating its causes. Dr Chao
considers exhaustion to be due to the ‘6 Excesses’ (overexertion
leading to depletion of Qi, Blood, Sinews, Bones, Muscles and
Essence) and the ‘7 Injuries’. The ‘7 Injuries’ refer to the damage
709
inflicted on the Internal Organs by various excesses such as:
 
• 
 
overeating injuring the Spleen
• 
 
prolonged anger injuring the Liver
• 
 
lifting excessive weights or sitting on damp ground
injuring the Kidneys
• 
 
exposure to cold and drinking cold liquids injuring
the Lungs
• 
 
exposure to wind, rain, cold and heat injuring the
body
• 
 
fear, anxiety and shock injuring the Mind.
 
2
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 23
 
lists five causes of
exhaustion:
 
• 
 
excessive use of the eyes injuring the Heart
• 
 
excessive lying down injuring the Lungs
• 
 
excessive sitting injuring the Spleen
• 
 
excessive standing injuring the Kidneys
• 
 
excessive exercise injuring the Liver.
 
3
Over the centuries various doctors discussed the treatment of
exhaustion according to their particular views and emphases. For
example, Li Dong Yuan, author of the famous ‘Discussion on
Stomach and Spleen’ (
Pi Wei Lun
 
, 1249),
 
4
 
considered Stomach and
Spleen deficiency to be the main cause of exhaustion. Zhu Dan Xi,
author of ‘Secrets of Dan Xi’ (
Dan Xi Xin Fa
 
, 1347),
 
5
 
placed the
emphasis on Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency as a cause of
exhaustion and advocated nourishing Yin and clearing Heat.
Zhang Jie Bin, author of the ‘Classic of Categories’ (
Lei Jing
 
, 1624)
 
6
and the ‘Complete Book of Jing Yue’ (
Jing Yue Quan Shu
 
, 1624),
 
7
advocated tonifying the Kidneys for the treatment of exhaustion.
Zhu Qi Shi (1463–1539) considered the Lungs, Spleen and
Kidneys to be the three most important organs to treat in
exhaustion. He said in his book ‘Discussion on Exhaustion’ (
Xu Lao
710
Lun
 
): 
‘
To treat Exhaustion there are three roots: Lungs, Spleen and
Kidneys. Lungs are like the “heaven” of the internal organs, the
Spleen is like the “mother” of the body and the Kidneys are like the
“root” of life. Treat these three organs to treat Exhaustion
 
.’
 
8
 
Dr
Zhu indicated the Spleen and Lungs as the two main organs to
treat in cases of chronic tiredness, the Spleen for Yang deficiency
and the Lungs for Yin deficiency. Each of these can eventually lead
to Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency and Yang deficiency can
lead to Yin deficiency, or vice versa. Dr Zhu says: 
‘
To treat
Deficiency there are two interconnected systems: either the Lungs
or the Spleen. Every [Deficiency] disease boils down to Yang or Yin
deficiency. Yang deficiency can lead to Yin deficiency after a
prolonged time. Yin deficiency can lead to Yang deficiency after a
prolonged time. In Yang deficiency treat the Spleen, in Yin deficiency
treat the Lungs.
 
’
 
9
Thus, tiredness is included in the concept of exhaustion,
although the latter is a more serious condition than simple
tiredness. However, although exhaustion contemplates only
Deficiency causes, tiredness may also be due to Full causes;
Dampness, Phlegm and Qi stagnation are common causes of
tiredness.
PATTERNS CAUSING TIREDNESS
A chronic feeling of tiredness is usually due to Deficiency. This
may be Qi, Yang, Blood or Yin deficiency. In some cases, tiredness
may also be due to a Full condition, and especially Dampness,
Phlegm or Qi stagnation.
The pulse is an important sign to differentiate Full from Empty
types of tiredness: if the pulse is Full 
in general (often Slippery or
Wiry) it indicates that the tiredness is caused by a Full condition
(usually Dampness, Phlegm or Qi stagnation).
 
Remember
 
: tiredness is not always due to a condition
of 
Deficiency
 
. It can be, and it often is, due to a 
Full
condition.
711
Dampness and Phlegm are ‘heavy’ and weigh down the body so
that the person feels heavy and tired. Qi stagnation may also make
a person feel tired; this is not because there is not enough Qi but
because, being stagnant, Qi does not circulate properly. This
situation is more common in men and it often reflects a state of
mental depression. The classic example would be that of a man
who seeks treatment primarily for tiredness and whose pulse and
tongue reveal no Deficiency at all but only severe Qi stagnation,
the pulse being very Wiry and Full on all positions and the tongue
being Red on the sides. In such a situation the man feels tired
from Qi stagnation and his tiredness is closely linked to a state of
mental depression (itself often deriving from repressed anger).
Chronic tiredness associated with a desire to lie down, poor
appetite and loose stools indicates Spleen-Qi deficiency, which is
probably the most common cause of it; if there are Cold
symptoms, it is due to Spleen-Yang deficiency.
Chronic tiredness associated with a weak voice and a propensity
to catching colds indicates Lung-Qi deficiency; if there are Cold
symptoms, it is due to Lung-Yang deficiency.
Chronic tiredness associated with backache, lassitude, a feeling
of cold, depression and frequent urination indicates Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Chronic tiredness associated with slight depression, dizziness
and scanty periods indicates Liver-Blood deficiency.
Chronic tiredness associated with anxiety, insomnia, a dry
mouth at night and a tongue without coating is due to Kidney-Yin
deficiency.
Chronic tiredness associated with a feeling of heaviness of the
body and muzziness of the head indicates retention of Dampness.
Chronic tiredness associated with a feeling of oppression of the
chest, dizziness and muzziness of the head indicates retention of
Phlegm.
Chronic tiredness in an anxious and tense person with a Wiry
pulse indicates stagnation of Liver-Qi.
Short-term tiredness with alternating cold and hot feeling,
irritability, unilateral tongue coating and a Wiry pulse indicates the
Lesser-Yang pattern (either of the Six Stages or of the Four Levels).
Case histories 33.1
 
–
33.7
 
illustrate different patterns causing
712
tiredness.
 
Case History 33.1
A 56-year-old woman complained of extreme tiredness
for the past 3 years since the death of her husband. She
said her legs ‘felt like lead’ and had no motivation to do
all the things that needed to be done in the house. She
had also been suffering from insomnia, also since her
husband’s death. She said ‘I feel pain inside but the
tears don’t come’. As she is stoically trying to live
through her pain without crying, her grief and
depression is probably somatized more, causing more
physical symptoms.
Apart from these main two problems she presented
with, she had also been suffering from occipital
headaches since the birth of her second child 26 years
before. On interrogation, it transpired that she also
experienced dizziness, hot flushes, urination at night
and abdominal distension and heaviness.
Her tongue was slightly Red, Stiff, dry, with a sticky
coating and a Heart crack; her pulse was Slippery on the
right, Floating-Empty on the left and Weak and Deep on
the left Rear position.
Diagnosis:
 
This is a complex combination of patterns.
The overwhelming factor is, however, the obvious grief
and depression following the death of her husband; the
symptom she first complained of was ‘tiredness’ but, as
she went on talking, it was obvious that this was due to
a deep depression following the grief caused by her
husband’s death: hence the lack of motivation and
insomnia.
From the point of view of patterns, there is obviously
a deficiency of Kidney-Yin evidenced by the urination at
night, the headaches stemming from the second birth,
the dizziness, the hot flushes, the Red, Stiff and dry
tongue, the Floating-Empty quality of the pulse on the
left and Weak-Deep Kidney pulse on the left.
Accompanying the Kidney-Yin deficiency there is also
Heart-Yin deficiency causing the insomnia and
713
manifesting with the deep Heart crack. In addition to
these conditions, there is also some Dampness
evidenced by the abdominal distension and heaviness
and by the sticky tongue coating.
 
Case History 33.2
An 18-year-old girl had been suffering from tiredness
and lassitude for the previous 9 months: this came on
gradually and was also accompanied by recurrent sore
throats, temporal headaches, a feeling of heaviness,
dizziness, a feeling of muzziness of the head, blurred
vision, phlegm in the throat and an alternation of hot
and cold feeling.
Her tongue was slightly Red on the sides, with red
points on the right side and her pulse was generally
Wiry.
Diagnosis:
 
This is a very clear example of the Lesser-
Yang pattern, not from the Six Stages, but from the Qi
level of the Four Levels (called ‘Gall-Bladder Heat’). The
Gall-Bladder Heat pattern from the Four Levels differs
from the Lesser-Yang pattern of the Six Stages in so far
as it is characterized by more Heat than Cold and by
the presence of Phlegm. This patient’s symptoms
clearly confirm this as the red points on the right side
of the tongue indicate that there is more Heat, while the
feeling of heaviness, the feeling of muzziness of the
head and the phlegm in the throat indicate the
presence of Phlegm.
This is also a good example of tiredness caused not
by Deficiency, but by Heat.
 
Case History 33.3
A 54-year-old man complained of chronic tiredness and
714
lassitude; this was his main presenting complaint.
During the interrogation very few other symptoms
emerged: in fact the only other symptom of note was
the presence of loose stools. There were no other
symptoms of Spleen deficiency, nor of Kidney
deficiency. This patient looked very quiet and subdued,
spoke with a very low voice and walked rather slowly;
his facial complexion was quite red.
His tongue was Reddish-Purple in general, and
especially on the right side and had a Red tip. His pulse
was Wiry in general.
Diagnosis:
 
This is an example of a situation when the
demeanour of the patient contradicts the pulse and
tongue. His slow walk, low voice and quiet demeanour
all indicate Deficiency, while the tongue and pulse
clearly indicate the presence of a Full condition. This is
also an example when, in the absence of many
symptoms, the tongue and pulse become even more
important than usual. His tongue indicates Liver-Blood
stasis (because it is more Purple on the right side) and
his pulse confirms this. Liver-Blood stasis nearly always
develops from chronic Liver-Qi stagnation and we can
therefore assume that this patient has been suffering
from Liver-Qi stagnation for a long time. The most
common cause of Liver-Qi stagnation is an emotional
problem related to anger, resentment or frustration. In
this case, therefore, the chronic tiredness is due, not to
a Deficiency, but to a Fullness; the symptom of loose
stools, which normally indicates Spleen-Qi deficiency,
may be here due to stagnant Liver-Qi invading the
Spleen. Thus, although this patient complains primarily
of tiredness, it is obvious that he also suffers from
mental depression.
 
Case History 33.4
715
A 39-year-old man had been suffering from extreme
tiredness for many years; the tiredness was
accompanied by a feeling of weakness of the limbs and
was worse in the morning. When asked whether the
tiredness was accompanied by a feeling of heaviness, he
said that it was, but only during an acute respiratory
infection. He was also prone to frequent colds and
upper respiratory infections which affected his sinuses
every time, causing a congested feeling in the face and a
sticky nasal discharge. Ten years previously he had
been experiencing very poor digestion and frequent
bouts of diarrhoea; he had been diagnosed as suffering
from coeliac disease (from which his father also
suffered) and he improved considerably by avoiding
gluten. However, he still suffered from an alternation of
bouts of loose stools and constipation. On interrogation
it transpired that his mouth and lips were frequently
dry.
His body type clearly belonged to the Wood element,
being tall and thin, but he walked in a slow and slightly
awkward way which did not fit in with the Wood body
type. He looked fairly relaxed and placid and he spoke
slowly and with a soft voice. His complexion was dull-
pale yellow but his eyelids, especially the upper ones,
were rather red.
His tongue was Red on the sides in the Spleen area,
Swollen and had a yellow coating. His pulse was
generally Slippery.
Diagnosis:
 
There are clear manifestations of Spleen-
Qi deficiency, that is, the tiredness, the feeling of
weakness, being prone to frequent colds, the tendency
to loose stools and the dull-pale-yellow complexion; the
history of coeliac disease (affecting his father as well)
indicates that he most probably suffered from a
constitutional Spleen deficiency. The Spleen deficiency
had obviously given rise to Dampness which is
manifesting with the sinus congestion, the feeling of
heaviness during acute infections and the Slippery
716
pulse.
There is a third, rather uncommon pattern and that is
Spleen-Heat which is causing the tendency to
constipation, the dry mouth, dry lips and manifests on
the tongue with a Red colour on the sides in the Spleen
areas and a yellow coating.
The contrast between his body type, which pertains
to Wood, and his prevailing disharmony in the Earth
element is a poor prognostic sign; that is, it is better for
a Wood type to suffer from a Wood disharmony.
 
Case History 33.5
A 49-year-old man had been suffering from tiredness
and palpitations for the past 18 months. He also
complained of irritability and said that all his
symptoms became worse in the afternoon.
In the few weeks before the consultation, he had
developed a burning sensation on urination. This was a
recurrence of a symptom that he had suffered from
previously.
His tongue was Swollen and the sides were Red. His
pulse was Wiry and Slow.
Diagnosis:
 
In this case, the overall Wiry nature of the
pulse points towards the fact that the tiredness is
caused by Liver-Qi stagnation rather than Deficiency.
Liver-Qi stagnation is also, of course, the reason that
the patient often feels irritable. The stagnation has led
to some Heat, which is shown on the Red sides of the
tongue, and is causing the burning sensation on
urination. The Slow quality of the pulse may seem to
contradict the symptoms of Heat, but it is due to the
long-standing stagnation of Liver-Qi.
717
 
Case History 33.6
A 13-year-old boy had been suffering from headaches,
night sweating, weakness and tiredness for 3 weeks.
These symptoms had an acute onset in springtime and
his health and energy before that were good. On closer
questioning, his weakness consisted mostly of a feeling
of weary limbs and he also complained of an epigastric
discomfort which he found difficult to describe; he said
that it was like ‘a feeling of hunger’ and could not
decide whether it was hunger or pain. This was also
accompanied by a feeling of nausea. In addition, he also
experienced ache in the joints, especially of the legs,
dizziness, restless sleep and irritability.
His tongue was very slightly Red on the sides and had
a sticky-white coating. His pulse was Slippery-Wiry-
Rapid (92 b.p.m).
Diagnosis:
 
The essential feature of this boy’s
condition is its acute onset. If we analyse his symptoms
in isolation, many different patterns would emerge:
Damp-Heat in the joints (ache in the joints), Liver-Yang
rising (headaches, irritability, dizziness), Yin deficiency
(night sweating, epigastric discomfort with feeling of
hunger), Spleen-Qi deficiency (weakness, tiredness,
weary limbs) and Stomach-Qi not descending (nausea).
However, if we take the sudden onset into account and
consider the symptoms in their totality, it then becomes
apparent that this problem is caused by the emergence
of Latent Heat in springtime. In this particular case,
Latent Heat manifests as Damp-Heat.
Latent Heat occurs when an external pathogenic
factor invades the body (in theory in winter but it can
happen in any season) without causing apparent
symptoms at the time; the pathogenic factor goes into
the Interior, turns into Heat and ‘lurks’ in the Interior
to emerge later with a sudden onset in springtime.
When it emerges, Latent Heat manifests with
symptoms of Interior Heat but with an acute onset; in
this boy’s case the symptoms of Heat are insomnia,
718
restless sleep, irritability, night sweating, feeling of
hunger, Red sides of the tongue and Rapid pulse. The
symptoms of Damp-Heat are weary limbs, ache in the
joints, sticky tongue coating and a Slippery pulse.
Although the symptoms appear quite complex, the
treatment is relatively simple and it should consist in
clearing Heat and resolving Damp with a prescription
such as Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
 
Case History 33.7
A 20-year-old woman had been suffering from postviral
fatigue syndrome for 3 years. Her symptoms were
extreme fatigue, swollen glands, a mild, intermittent
sore throat, a feeling of tightness of the chest, ache in
the muscles, a feeling of muzziness of the head,
dizziness, a feeling of heaviness, an alternating feeling
of heat and cold, headaches on the temples, blurred
vision, tinnitus, thirst, a sticky taste, loose stools and
fits of crying. She suffered an acute and severe attack of
glandular fever (mononucleosis) when she was 16,
which confined her to bed for a long time. On further
questioning, she also said that she felt ‘a pulsation’ in
the chest and epigastrium and that she suffered from
insomnia.
Her tongue was Red in general and slightly Swollen
with a sticky coating, and her pulse was Slippery and
Rapid (92).
Diagnosis:
 
There are two main patterns emerging
from the numerous symptoms and signs: the first is
residual Damp-Heat following the original acute attack
of glandular fever and the second is the pattern of Gall-
Bladder Heat of the Qi level within the identification of
patterns according to the Four Levels. The Gall-Bladder
Heat pattern of the Qi level is equivalent to the Lesser-
Yang pattern of the Six Stages, the main difference
719
being that it is characterized by more Heat.
The symptoms and signs of Damp-Heat are extreme
fatigue, swollen glands, ache in the muscles,
intermittent sore throat, feeling of muzziness, feeling
of heaviness, sticky taste, thirst, loose stools, a feeling
of pulsation in the chest and epigastrium, insomnia,
Swollen and Red tongue with sticky coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse. Some of these symptoms are related to the
actual Dampness and some to Heat. The symptoms and
signs of the Gall-Bladder Heat pattern are alternation of
feeling of heat and cold, headaches on the temples,
dizziness, blurred vision, tinnitus, insomnia and a
Rapid pulse.
Box 33.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying tiredness.
 
BOX 33.1
 
   
 
TIREDNESS
• 
 
Tiredness with desire to lie down, poor appetite, loose
stools: Spleen-Qi or Spleen-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Tiredness with weak voice, tendency to catch colds:
Lung-Qi or Lung-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Tiredness with backache, lassitude, depression,
frequent urination: Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Tiredness with slight depression, dizziness: Liver-
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Tiredness with anxiety, insomnia, dry mouth, Kidney-
Yin deficiency
• 
 
Tiredness with feeling of heaviness: Dampness
• 
 
Tiredness with feeling of oppression of the chest:
Phlegm
• 
 
Tiredness with anxiety and tenseness: Liver-Qi
stagnation
NOTES
720
1. 
Ren, He. A New Explanation of the Synopsis of
Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet (
Jin Gui Yao Lue Xin
Jie
 
 
). Zhejiang Science Publishing House: Beijing,
1981:44 The Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden
Cabinet was written by Zhang Zhong Jing c. 
AD
 
200
2. 
Chao Yuan Fang 
AD
 
610 Discussion on Causes and
Symptoms of Diseases (
Zhu Bing Yuan Hou Lun
 
 
)
cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Chinese Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi
Nei Ke Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing
House, 1986; 281.
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:154 First
published c. 100
BC
 
.
4. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and Technology
Publishing House, 1986; 281.
5. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and Technology
Publishing House, 1986; 281.
6. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and Technology
Publishing House, 1986; 281.
7. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science and Technology
Publishing House, 1986; 281.
8. 
Shi, Zhu Qi. Discussion on Exhaustion (
Xu Lao Lun
 
 
).
Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1988; 19. [First
published c. 1520].
9. 
Shi, Zhu Qi. Discussion on Exhaustion (
Xu Lao Lun
 
 
).
Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1988; 21.
721
CHAPTER 34
 
HEAD
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
HEADACHE
    
Onset
Time
Location
Character of pain
Ameliorating or aggravating factors
Internal and external origin
DIZZINESS
FAINTING
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE HEAD
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE HEAD
FEELING OF MUZZINESS (FUZZINESS) OF THE HEAD
BRAIN NOISE
FEELING OF COLD OF THE HEAD
FEELING OF HEAT OF THE HEAD
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE SKIN OF THE HEAD
722
ITCHY SCALP
INTRODUCTION
The head is called the ‘Fu of the Bright Essence’ because it houses
the Brain, which is a manifestation of the Sea of Marrow and
Marrow itself is a manifestation of Essence; as the Essence is
stored in the Kidneys, the head is also under the influence of the
Kidneys. The hair on the head is nourished by the Kidneys and Qi
and Blood in general and for this reason the hair was said to be the
‘abundance of Blood’ and the ‘glory of the Kidneys’. The head is
also called the ‘Meeting of all Yang’ because all the Yang channels
meet in the head where they either end or begin. The head also
houses the senses and the Yang channels bring to it clear Yang-Qi,
which ‘brightens’ the senses’ orifices and enables a person to have
clear sight, hearing, taste and smell.
WHY
 
WE ASK
It is important to ask about any problems in the head with
practically every patient, first because headache and dizziness are
such common complaints and secondly because patients may
often forget about some head symptoms unless they are asked. For
example, not many patients would volunteer the information of
having an itchy scalp or a feeling of heaviness of the head.
Problems related to the head often serve to confirm or exclude the
presence of Liver patterns (although of course not exclusively Liver
patterns). For example, the symptoms of itchiness of the scalp in a
patient presenting with a possible Liver disharmony would
confirm such disharmony as it may be due to Liver-Blood
deficiency, Wind in the skin (also Liver related), Liver-Fire or
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Questions about the head are obviously particularly important in
723
patients who suffer from headaches; however, they are also
important in the elderly and in those suffering from hypertension
or tinnitus. In the elderly they have particular importance because
head symptoms such as headache, dizziness, feeling of distension
of the head, etc. often occur with serious pathologies such as
hypertension or may be prodromal signs of Wind-stroke.
I also ask about head symptoms whenever there is Liver-Qi
stagnation or Liver-Blood stasis to check whether there may be
also Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Fire, which tend to cause symptoms
in the head. For example, a woman may complain of premenstrual
tension characterized by irritability and breast distension. She may
also suffer from premenstrual headaches but may not relate them
to the premenstrual phase. The presence of headaches would
confirm that there is Liver-Yang rising in conjunction with Liver-Qi
stagnation; if we did not ask about the headache, we would never
know this. This situation arises especially in Liver disharmonies
because in such disharmonies it is common for a patient to suffer
from two, three, or even four concomitant Liver patterns.
HOW
 
WE ASK
I usually ask about any head symptoms whenever this is
appropriate during the interrogation.
I especially ask about head symptoms whenever a Liver
disharmony emerges to check whether there may be Liver-Yang
rising or Liver-Fire.
HEADACHE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Headache is one of the most common presenting symptoms in
Western patients; Chinese books differentiate first of all between
headaches of internal origin and those of external origin, but the
latter are not frequently seen in practice.
When asking a patient about headaches it is important to ask
systematically about onset, time, location, character of pain and
ameliorating or aggravating factors.
724
Onset
A recent onset and short duration indicate headache from exterior
invasion of Wind; a gradual onset with long duration indicates
headache from interior causes.
Time
Headache occurring in the daytime usually indicates Qi or Yang
deficiency, whereas headache occurring in the evening may be due
to Blood or Yin deficiency. Headache starting at night during sleep
indicates Blood stasis.
Location
 
• 
 
Occiput: here the location is the Greater-Yang
channels (the headache can be from exterior invasion of
Wind-Cold if the pain is severe or from interior Kidney
deficiency if the pain is dull) (
Fig. 34.1
 
).
FIG. 34.1
 
Location of occipital and vertical headache
• 
 
Vertex: here the location is the terminal Yin channels
(the headache is usually from deficiency of Liver-Blood)
(
Fig. 34.1
 
).
• 
 
Forehead: here the location is the Bright-Yang
channels (the headache can be from Stomach-Heat or
Blood deficiency) (
Fig. 34.2
 
).
725
FIG. 34.2
 
Location of frontal headache
• 
 
Temples and sides of the head: here the location is
Lesser-Yang channels (the headache can be from
exterior Wind in the Lesser-Yang or from Liver-Yang
rising) (
Fig. 34.3
 
).
FIG. 34.3
 
Location of Lesser-Yang headache
• 
 
Temple, side of head and eye: here the location is the
Lesser-Yang channels (the headache is usually from
Liver- Yang rising) (
Fig. 34.4
 
).
726
FIG. 34.4
 
Location of Liver-Yang rising headache
• 
 
Behind the eyes: here the location is the Liver channel
(the headache cause is either Liver-Yang rising or Liver-
Blood deficiency) (
Fig. 34.5
 
).
FIG. 34.5
 
Location of headache behind the eyes
• 
 
Whole head: this is caused by exterior invasion of
Wind-Heat or Kidney deficiency.
Character Of Pain
A dull ache usually indicates Deficiency whereas an intense, sharp
pain usually indicates Excess. A throbbing and distending pain
indicates Liver-Yang rising, a pulling pain indicates Liver-Wind
and a fixed, boring pain indicates Blood stasis. A dull ache, with
the head 
feeling as if it were wrapped in or full of cotton wool, and
727
a sensation of heaviness indicate Dampness or Phlegm. Headache
that is experienced ‘inside’ the head is usually due to a Kidney
deficiency (see below).
Ameliorating Or Aggravating Factors
Chronic headaches that are improved by rest are due to Deficiency,
whereas if they are improved by exercise they are due to Liver-Fire,
Phlegm or Blood stasis. Headaches aggravated by lying down
usually indicate Fullness (Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire, Phlegm or
Blood stasis). If they are ameliorated by lying down they usually
indicate Deficiency.
Headaches that are improved by eating usually indicate
Deficiency; if they are aggravated by eating they usually indicate
Excess, especially Phlegm or retention of food.
Internal And Exterior Origin
The differentiation of headaches is best done by distinguishing
headaches of interior origin from those of exterior origin.
Headaches of internal origin
In headaches of internal origin, it is very important to differentiate
between those deriving from Fullness and those deriving from
Emptiness. The most common headaches from Fullness include
Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire, Phlegm, Blood stasis, Liver-Wind,
Stomach-Heat and retention of food; the most common headaches
from Emptiness include Blood deficiency, Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency and Kidney deficiency.
The headache from Liver-Yang rising manifests with a throbbing
pain, which is usually unilateral, often moving from side to side
and located behind the eye, on 
the temples or on the lateral side of
the head along the Gall-Bladder channel. It is often accompanied
by nausea and vomiting, dizziness, blurred vision, flashing lights
and a Wiry pulse.
The headache from Liver-Fire, which is less common, is similar
in character to that from Liver-Yang rising but it is accompanied by
Liver-Fire symptoms and signs such as intense thirst, bitter taste,
728
red face, dark urine and dry stools.
Another very common type of headache is that from Phlegm
obstructing the clear orifices of the head: in this case the headache
is dull in nature and the head feels as if it were wrapped in or full
of cotton wool and with a pronounced feeling of heaviness,
muzziness and blurred vision. Other manifestations include a
feeling of nausea, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a Swollen
tongue and a Slippery pulse.
A very common type of chronic headache is the one due to a
combination of Phlegm and internal Wind. Such a headache has all
the characteristics as the one from Phlegm but is characterized by
occasional bouts of severe headaches from Wind. Such a pattern is
called ‘Wind-Phlegm’. However, Phlegm as a cause of headache is
frequently also associated with Liver-Yang rising, with the Phlegm
being carried upwards by the ascending Liver-Yang; a person
suffering from these two patterns will suffer from chronic, dull
headaches with a feeling of muzziness and dizzines (caused by
Phlegm) punctuated by occasional, acute attacks of severe,
throbbing headaches (caused by Liver-Yang rising). Such pattern is
also called ‘Wind-Phlegm’.
The headache from Blood stasis is characterized by an intense,
fixed, boring pain, usually unilateral, and accompanied by a Purple
tongue and Wiry pulse. In very chronic, long-standing cases of
headache, the Blood stasis type of pain may often be combined
with other types; the chronic recurrence of a headache in the same
part of the head may by itself cause local Blood stasis. For example,
if a patient suffers from a Liver-Yang type of headache for many
years occurring always on the right side, this may by itself cause a
local stasis of Blood in the head on that side and thus the headache
will manifest with symptoms of both Liver-Yang rising and Blood
stasis.
The headache from Liver-Wind is characterized by a pulling
pain, accompanied by severe dizziness and tremors.
The headache from Stomach-Heat is characterized by an intense
frontal pain and is accompanied by epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation and a yellow tongue coating.
The headache from retention of food is charac-terized by a
diffused and intense dull pain on the forehead and is accompanied
729
by nausea, vomiting, sour regurgitation, a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium, a thick and sticky tongue coating and a Slippery
pulse.
The headache from Blood deficiency (usually of the Liver or
Heart, or both) is characterized by a dull ache, usually on the top
of the head, and is accompanied by dizziness, blurred vision,
insomnia, palpitations, a Pale tongue and a Choppy pulse.
The headache from Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency is
characterized by a dull frontal ache and is accompanied by
tiredness, lassitude, weak limbs, loose stools, poor appetite, a Pale
tongue and a Weak pulse.
The headache from Kidney deficiency (which could be Yin or
Yang deficiency) is characterized by a dull headache all over the
head, accompanied by a feeling of emptiness of the head,
dizziness and tinnitus.
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel may cause a dull but
intense, vertical headache associated with cold feet. However, this
headache is rather rare.
Headaches of external origin
External headaches are due to invasion of Wind-Cold, Wind-Heat
and Wind-Dampness and they all obviously have an acute onset.
The headache from Wind-Cold is characterized by a severe
occipital ache and stiffness and is accompanied by pronounced
aversion to cold, fever, sneezing and a Floating-Tight pulse.
The headache from Wind-Heat is characterized by a severe pain
as if the head were being cracked open and is accompanied by
aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, slight sweating and a Floating-
Rapid pulse.
The headache from Wind-Dampness is characterized by a dull
headache as if the head were wrapped up and is accompanied by a
feeling of heaviness of the head, aversion to cold, fever, slight
sweating, nausea and a Floating-Slippery pulse.
Figure 34.6
 
is a classification of headaches.
730
FIG. 34.6
 
Classification of headaches
Case histories 34.1
 
–
34.5
 
illustrate some different patterns
causing headache.
 
Case History 34.1
A 14-year-old girl had been suffering from recurring
headaches since the age of 10 years. The headaches
were severe and came approximately every 3 months.
The headache was concentrated in the area behind the
eyes, was throbbing in character and was accompanied
by blurred vision, vomiting, and what she described as
‘fuzzy eyes’. Apart from the attacks of severe headaches
every 3 months, she also experienced frequent, dull
headaches in between.
On interrogation, she said she suffered from chronic
tiredness and experienced some tingling of her limbs.
Her tongue was Pale, slightly Swollen and with a
sticky coating; her pulse was slightly Slippery.
Diagnosis:
 
The headaches are very clearly of the
Liver-Yang type: this is confirmed by the throbbing
character of the pain, the location behind the eyes and
the vomiting. However, there are two other patterns
which are evidenced by very few symptoms. First of all,
there is some Liver-Blood deficiency, which is indicated
by the chronic tiredness, the Pale tongue and the
tingling; Liver-Blood deficiency is obviously the cause
731
for the rising of Liver-Yang in this case. Secondly, there
is also some Phlegm; this is evidenced mostly by the
tongue (being Swollen and with a sticky coating) and
pulse (being Slippery). The ‘fuzzy eyes’ could also be
interpreted as a sign of Phlegm obstructing the eye
orifices.
This is a good example of the importance of tongue
and pulse as pointers to a certain pattern even in the
absence of symptoms; for this reason, tongue and pulse
pictures should never be discounted when they do not
appear to accord with the presenting symptoms. For
example, in this case of Liver-Blood deficiency with
Liver-Yang rising, the tongue ‘should’ have been Pale
and Thin and the pulse might have been Wiry on the
left and Weak on the right. Why should the tongue and
pulse show a certain pattern and the patient not show
any signs of it? This often happens in young people
when there is a certain pathogenic factor (in this case
Phlegm) but, due to the young age of the person, it has
not given rise to clinical manifestations as yet.
The treatment principle in this case should therefore
be not only to nourish Liver-Blood and subdue Liver-
Yang but also to resolve Phlegm.
 
Case History 34.2
A 28-year-old woman had been suffering from migraine
since the age of 13. She was thin, quite tall and she
walked with agility: her body shape was a typical Wood
type (see 
Chapter 1
 
). Her complexion was dull sallow,
her hair was dry and her eyes had good 
shen
 
.
The headaches were of a throbbing character and
always occurred on the left side of the head, along the
Gall-Bladder channel and behind the left eye; they
occurred weekly and they were nearly always
accompanied by nausea, vomiting and photophobia.
732
The headache was not affected by posture or food
intake and, although a headache always occurred with
her period, she also suffered from headaches at other
times. The headaches were aggravated by damp and
windy weather and also by stress and fatigue. A striking
feature of the headaches was that they were markedly
better during two pregnancies and markedly worse
soon after childbirth both times. She had two children,
one 3 years old and one 6 months old. An EEG and CT
scan revealed no abnormalities and drugs for migraine
produced an aggravation.
The periods were quite normal, coming regularly,
with normal amount and colour but rather painful on
the first 2 days. Her general health was good with no
abnormalities in urination or defecation or sleep.
Diagnosis:
 
Observation of her body type indicates
that she is a Wood type: her agile walk accords with
this, which is a good sign. As mentioned in the chapter
on observation, each Five-Element body type has a
characteristic walk and a deviation from this is not a
good sign. For example, the Wood type should walk in
an agile way and if they walked stiffly it would not be a
good sign. Her dull complexion and dry hair suggest
Blood deficiency; the normal sparkle of her eyes
suggested that she did not suffer from any deep
emotional problem.
The marked amelioration during pregnancy and
aggravation after childbirth strongly suggests a
deficiency of the Kidneys and the disharmony of the
Penetrating and Directing Vessels: this is confirmed
also by the onset of the headaches soon after menarche
(which occurred when she was aged 12½.
We therefore need to confirm the presence of Blood
deficiency and Kidney deficiency with further
questioning. To confirm or exclude Blood deficiency, we
ask about numbness and tingling of the limbs,
dizziness, poor memory, insomnia, blurred vision: she
did suffer from tingling of her limbs but from none of
733
the other symptoms. However, we can conclude that
there is some Blood deficiency from the tingling of her
limbs, the dull complexion and the dry hair. As for
Kidney deficiency, she had no symptoms of it apart
from lower backache, but this symptom together with
the onset of the headaches at menarche, the
amelioration during pregnancy and the aggravation
after childbirth confirms the presence of a Kidney
deficiency and the disharmony of the Penetrating and
Directing Vessels.
Her tongue was very slightly Pale but Red on the
sides, Swollen and with a sticky coating and there was a
small, peeled patch on the left side in the breast area;
her pulse was generally Weak and Empty at the deep
level.
The Pale colour of the tongue and the weakness and
emptiness of the pulse confirm Blood deficiency and
Kidney deficiency. However, the swelling of the tongue
body and the sticky coating point to Phlegm, something
that was not apparent from observation nor
interrogation: her thin body indicates a tendency to
Blood and Yin deficiency whereas Phlegm usually
manifests with a tendency to being overweight.
Furthermore, she had no other symptoms of Phlegm:
there was no dizziness, no blurred vision, no feeling of
heaviness of the head, no dull headaches, no
expectoration of phlegm. However, in these cases, I
never discount the tongue signs and I concluded that,
although she had no other symptoms of Phlegm, the
tongue signs were clear enough to confirm the presence
of Phlegm; this is confirmed by the aggravation of the
headaches in damp weather. The simultaneous
presence of Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm is a very
common cause of chronic headaches.
The character of her headaches points very clearly to
Liver-Yang rising: this is confirmed by the throbbing
nature of the pain, the nausea and vomiting, the
sensitivity to light and the location of the headache on
734
the Gall-Bladder channel. We can therefore conclude
that the causes of the rising of Liver-Yang are the Blood
and the Kidney deficiency: the former constitutes the
Manifestation (
Biao
 
) and the latter the Root (
Ben
 
).
From the point of view of Deficiency and Excess, the
former consists of the Blood deficiency, Kidney
deficiency and also Spleen-Qi deficiency, while the
latter consists of Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm. We can
deduce the presence of Spleen-Qi deficiency from the
presence of Phlegm and from the Weak pulse.
The Pale colour of her tongue body can be attributed
to any or all of her deficiencies, that is, Blood-Kidney-
and Spleen-Qi deficiency. The redness of the sides
confirms the rising of Liver-Yang and the swelling of
the tongue body and the sticky coating indicate
Phlegm. The last aspect of her tongue to interpret is the
peeled patch on the left side in what may, under certain
circumstances, be the breast area. There are two ways of
interpreting the significance of this peeled patch: it
could indicate either the very beginning of Yin
deficiency (which may develop from Blood deficiency)
or a problem in the left breast. This could be a problem
in the left breast (such as mastitis) developed after
childbirth; however, the patient said that this was not
the case. The other possible explanation is that the
peeled patch may indicate a more serious potential
problem in the left breast such as a malignant lump.
In this case we need to treat both the Root and
Manifestation simultaneously: the Root by nourishing
Blood, tonifying Spleen and Kidneys and strengthening
the Penetrating and Directing Vessels, and the
Manifestation by subduing Liver-Yang and resolving
Phlegm.
 
Case History 34.3
735
A 50-year-old woman had been suffering from
headaches since she was 18 years old. The headaches
occurred mostly on the right temple area, were of a
throbbing character and were accompanied by blurred
vision. The headaches were better during two
pregnancies and worse from taking HRT.
She also suffered from insomnia and constipation,
her periods had recently become irregular and the
menstrual blood had dark clots. Her cheeks were red
and her eyes lacked sparkle and looked nervous. Her
tongue was Red and slightly Purple, redder on the sides
and did not have enough coating; her pulse was Fine
and slightly Rapid.
Diagnosis:
 
The headaches are clearly due to the
rising of Liver-Yang, indicated by their throbbing
character, the location on the temple, the blurred
vision, the red cheeks and the insomnia. In this case,
Liver-Yang rises from a deficiency of Liver-Yin, which is
manifested by the lack of coating on the tongue, the
constipation and the blurred vision. The amelioration
during the pregnancies and aggravation from taking
HRT in this case indicate a Liver disharmony.
The slightly Purple colour of the tongue indicates a
tendency to Blood stasis, of which the dark menstrual
clots were the only symptom.
 
Case History 34.4
A 36-year-old man complained of migraine since the
age of 11. The attacks came every few months affecting
either side of the head along the Gall-Bladder channel,
the pain was sharp and throbbing and it was often
accompanied by vomiting and blurred vision. In
between the severe attacks, he occasionally suffered
from a dull occipital headache. He also suffered from
high blood pressure for which he took medication,
736
which, however, did not control it well. He also
complained of a dry mouth and the interrogation did
not reveal any Kidney symptoms.
He was overweight and his complexion was dull and
pale with a greasy skin and several small, pale moles on
the face; his eyes were very dull and lacking in lustre.
His tongue was dark Red with a redder tip, Swollen and
with a rootless white coating that looked like salt.
Although he was on beta-blockers, which alter the
pulse significantly (making it Deep and Slow), his pulse
was very Weak on both Rear positions.
Diagnosis:
 
The headaches are clearly due to Liver-
Yang rising, which is evidenced by the severity and
throbbing nature of the pain, and by the vomiting and
blurred vision. In this case, the origin of Liver-Yang
rising is in Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: this is
apparent from the tongue, which shows a severe Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat. It is unusual, but not
infrequent, that there are no other symptoms of Kidney
deficiency and the dry mouth is the only symptom of
Yin deficiency. Exactly the same pathology that is
causing the headaches is also at the root of the
hypertension.
His complexion and body shape contradict the above
patterns because the complexion is dull and pale (while
it should be red or floating red) and the body shape is
overweight (whereas Yin deficiency usually causes a
person to be thin). This is due to the presence of
Phlegm of which he has no other symptoms. However,
certain signs do show the presence of Phlegm; these are
the swelling of the tongue, the dull-pale complexion,
the greasy skin with small pale moles and the
overweight body shape. The lack of lustre of the eyes
indicates severe emotional problems (which he
confirmed having), which may also be causing the
complexion to be dull and pale, contradicting the
tongue.
737
 
Case History 34.5
A 41-year-old woman had been suffering from
headaches for over 20 years and they had worsened in
the past year. The headaches occurred all over the head
and were generally dull in character; occasionally they
occurred on the left side of her forehead, in which case
they were sharp and throbbing in character.
She also suffered from chilblains, cold hands and feet
and tiredness, and she felt cold in general. Occasionally
she suffered a visual disturbance consisting in seeing
flashing lights. She had had two children, aged 2 and 6
and she had suffered a heavy blood loss after the
second childbirth.
Her tongue was slightly Pale on the sides and had a
Heart crack. Her pulse was Deep-Weak-Choppy.
Diagnosis:
 
There are symptoms and signs of Liver-
Blood deficiency, manifested by the dull headaches, the
visual disturbance, the Pale sides of the tongue and the
Choppy pulse. This Blood deficiency was obviously
aggravated by the haemorrhage after the second
childbirth, which explains the aggravation of her
headaches. Liver-Blood deficiency has in this case given
rise to Liver-Yang rising, which is causing the sharp,
throbbing headaches on the left side of the forehead. In
addition to this, there are also manifestations of
Kidney-Yang deficiency (feeling cold, cold hands and
feet, tiredness and the Deep-Weak pulse).
In this case, attention should be paid to treating both
the Root and the Manifestation but with special
emphasis on treating the Root, that is, nourishing Liver-
Blood and tonifying Kidney-Yang.
Box 34.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying headache.
 
BOX 34.1
 
   
 
HEADACHES
738
Onset
External invasion of Wind: recent onset, short duration
Internal headache: gradual onset, long duration
Time
Qi or Yang deficiency: headache in daytime
Blood or Yin deficiency: headache in the evening
Blood stasis: headache starting at night
Location
Greater-Yang channels: occipital headache
Terminal-Yin channels: headache on vertex
Bright-Yang channels: frontal headache
Lesser-Yang (Gall-Bladder) channel: headache on
temples and sides of the head, and eye
Liver channel: headache behind the eyes
External Wind, Kidney deficiency: headache of whole
head
Ameliorating factors
Liver-Fire, Phlegm, Blood stasis: headache improved by
exercise
Fullness: headache aggravated by lying down
Deficiency: headache ameliorated by lying down or
better after eating
Excess: headache worse after eating
Internal
Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire: throbbing
Dampness: dull headache with feeling of heaviness
Phlegm: dull headache with feeling of heaviness and
dizziness
Blood stasis: intense fixed, stabbing, boring headache
Liver-Wind: headache with pulling pain
Stomach-Heat: intense, frontal headache
Retention of food: severe, dull frontal headache
Blood deficiency: dull headache on vertex
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency: mild, dull frontal
739
headache
Kidney deficiency: headache with feeling of emptiness
of the head
External
External Wind-Cold: acute headache with occipital
stiffness
External Wind-Heat: acute, severe headache
External Wind-Dampness: acute, severe, dull headache
DIZZINESS
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
Dizziness is a common complaint, especially in the elderly in
whom it often is the main presenting problem.
WHY
 
WE ASK
It is necessary to ask about dizziness particularly with elderly
patients because dizziness may be a symptom of Liver-Wind or
Phlegm, or both, both of which are pathogenic factors seen in
Wind-stroke, to which elderly people are prone. In women,
dizziness is often a key symptom to establish the presence of
either Liver-Blood deficiency or a Kidney deficiency.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I generally ask about dizziness in the course of the interrogation to
confirm or exclude the presence of Liver-Blood deficiency, Kidney
deficiency, Liver-Yang rising or Phlegm in young and middle-aged
people or of Liver-Wind in the elderly.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When we ask about dizziness we should make it clear to the
740
patient that, even if this symptom is very sporadic, it still has a
clinical significance. Thus, we should ask something like ‘Do you
ever experience any dizziness, even occasionally?’
Dizziness can be due to four factors, which can be summarized
as Wind, Yang, Phlegm and Deficiency. In general a sudden onset
of dizziness indicates a Full condition whereas a gradual onset
indicates Deficiency.
The dizziness from Wind is very severe and the patient feels as if
the ground is moving to the point where he or she loses balance.
This is Liver-Wind and is usually seen only in the elderly.
The dizziness from Liver-Yang rising may be also severe but less
severe than that from Wind and is accompanied by headache and
blurred vision. This is common in patients of all ages.
The dizziness from Phlegm is less severe than in both Liver-
Wind and Liver-Yang and is accompanied by a feeling of heaviness
and muzziness of the head and nausea.
The dizziness from deficiency of Qi or Blood, or both, is mild. It
worsens when the person is tired; it may also be only postural.
Dizziness from Deficiency may be due to Blood deficiency (of the
Liver or Heart, or both), in which case it is accompanied by blurred
vision, poor memory and insomnia, or to Kidney deficiency, in
which case it is accompanied by tinnitus.
Of course, dizziness may also occur as a result of a head trauma.
Case history 34.6
 
illustrates a pattern underlying vertigo.
 
Case History 34.6
A 42-year-old woman had been suffering from severe
vertigo attacks for 20 years. She suffered severe attacks
with vomiting every 6 months but she also experienced
less severe attacks in between. The attacks occurred
usually in the morning, were aggravated by lying down
and alleviated by sitting up. These became more
frequent after the birth of her second child 2 ½ years
previously.
She walked rather slowly, her complexion was dull
and sallow, her eyes lacked sparkle and she generally
looked very depressed. She had very few other
symptoms: she felt cold in general, experienced
chilblains in winter, suffered from catarrh and
741
experienced backache.
Her tongue was relatively normal apart from the
sides being too Red; her pulse was Weak in general,
especially on the left side, and both Kidney positions
were very Weak and Deep.
Diagnosis:
 
In this patient, vertigo is caused by a
combination of Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm. Apart
from the dizziness, Liver-Yang rising is evidenced by
the Red sides of the tongue and Phlegm by the catarrh,
the vomiting, the aggravation on lying down and the
amelioration when sitting up. Phlegm is causing the
more frequent, less severe attacks of dizziness, while
Liver-Yang rising is causing the occasional severe
attacks.
Apart from these two patterns, there is a Kidney-
Yang deficiency and a Spleen-Qi deficiency. The Kidney-
Yang deficiency is manifested by the very Weak and
Deep pulse on both rear positions, the aggravation of
the dizziness after childbirth, the backache and the cold
feeling, while the Spleen-Qi deficiency is manifested by
the generally Weak pulse and the sallow complexion.
Both Spleen-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency are
obviously the root cause for the formation of Phlegm,
while the Kidney deficiency is the cause for Liver-Yang
rising. Therefore, Spleen-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency
are the Root (
Ben
 
) while Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm
are the Manifestation (
Biao
 
).
Box 34.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dizziness.
 
BOX 34.2
 
   
 
DIZZINESS
• 
 
Internal Liver-Wind: severe vertigo
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: dizziness with headaches with
blurred vision
• 
 
Phlegm: dizziness and muzziness, worse lying down
• 
 
Blood or Qi deficiency: mild dizziness, better lying
742
down
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: chronic mild dizziness and
tinnitus
• 
 
Head trauma: dizziness after accident
FAINTING
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
‘Fainting’ may range from sudden collapse with total loss of
consciousness to mild, transient episodes of ‘passing out’ but
without total loss of consciousness. For example, there are patients
who periodically ‘pass out’ but can still hear people around them.
The most important task is to differentiate Full from Empty
causes of fainting. In other words, fainting may occur either
because a pathogenic factor obstructs the Mind’s orifices or
because deficient Qi, Blood or Yin fail to anchor the Mind or
Ethereal Soul, or both.
The most common pathogenic factor to cloud the Mind’s orifices
is Phlegm, which will be manifested by a Swollen tongue with
sticky coating and Slippery pulse. Retention of food may also cloud
the Mind’s orifices, but this is rather more rare and it occurs more
in children or in the elderly.
Among the Empty causes of fainting are a deficiency of Blood or
Yin of the Heart or Liver, or both, and a deficiency of Kidney-Yang.
Fainting from a Full cause manifests with loss of consciousness,
whereas fainting from an Empty cause may manifest with
transient episodes of ‘passing out’ without total loss of
consciousness.
Of course, in many cases, there may be a combination of Full
and Empty patterns, for example Phlegm with Liver-Blood
deficiency.
Case history 34.7
 
illustrates a pattern of Yin deficiency causing
fainting episodes.
 
Case History 34.7
A 45-year-old woman had been suffering from what she
743
described as ‘turns’, that is, she had recurrent episodes
of fainting but without total loss of consciousness as,
during these episodes, she could hear people around
her. These episodes were more frequent during or after
her periods.
She felt very tired in general and had very little
vitality and energy. Her complexion was dull and pale,
her tongue was Pale, Swollen and partially peeled with a
patchy, sticky coating and her pulse was Weak but
slightly Slippery.
Diagnosis:
 
The swelling of the tongue with a sticky
coating, and the Slippery pulse, clearly indicate Phlegm
clouding the Mind’s orifices and causing fainting. The
Pale tongue, Weak pulse, dull-pale complexion and the
aggravation of the fainting episodes during or after the
period indicate a Liver-Blood deficiency. However, even
in the absence of other symptoms, the partial peeling of
the tongue clearly indicates a condition of Yin
deficiency, in this case probably of the Stomach and
Liver.
Box 34.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying fainting.
 
BOX 34.3
 
   
 
FAINTING
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Retention of food
• 
 
Blood or Yin deficiency of Heart/Liver
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE
HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A ‘feeling of distension of the head’ is characterized by a
744
bursting sensation as if the head were cracking open. The two
main causes of this symptom are Liver-Fire blazing and Dampness
obstructing the head.
The feeling of distension of the head caused by Liver-Fire is very
intense and is accompanied by a headache of a throbbing nature, a
dry mouth, bitter taste, a Red tongue with redder sides and a Wiry
pulse.
The feeling of distension of the head caused by Dampness is
less severe. Dull but intense, it is accompanied by the sensation
that the head were wrapped up. The head feels heavy and the
patient has nausea, a sticky tongue coating and a Slippery pulse.
Box 34.4
 
summarizes patterns underlying a feeling of distension
of the head.
 
BOX 34.4
 
   
 
FEELING OF DISTENSION
OF THE HEAD
• 
 
Liver-Fire blazing: very intense
• 
 
Dampness in head: dull, less intense
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE
HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
The symptom of a ‘feeling of heaviness of the head’ is very
common but it is not often reported spontaneously by patients
and must be elicited on interrogation. There are five main causes
of a feeling of heaviness of the head:
 
• 
 
invasion of Wind-Dampness
• 
 
Damp-Heat infusing upwards
• 
 
Dampness obstructing the Clear-Yang orifices
• 
 
Phlegm obstructing the head
• 
 
deficiency of Central Qi.
745
The feeling of heaviness of the head deriving from invasion of
Wind-Dampness has a sudden onset and is due to external
Dampness obstructing the head. It is accompanied by other
exterior symptoms such as aversion to cold, fever and a Floating
pulse.
The feeling of heaviness of the head due to Damp-Heat infusing
upwards is quite severe and is accompanied by a dull headache, a
red face, a feeling of heat of the head, a sticky taste, a sticky yellow
tongue coating and a Slippery-Rapid pulse.
The feeling of heaviness of the head caused by Dampness
obstructing the Clear-Yang orifices is quite severe and is
accompanied by blurred vision and a feeling of muzziness of the
head, nausea, decreased hearing, a sticky tongue coating and a
Slippery pulse.
The feeling of heaviness of the head caused by Phlegm is severe
and is accompanied by dizziness, a feeling of muzziness of the
head, blurred vision, decreased hearing, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, nausea, a Swollen tongue with sticky coating and a
Slippery pulse.
The feeling of heaviness of the head caused by deficiency of
Central Qi (deficiency of Stomach and Spleen) is mild and it is due
not to Dampness or Phlegm weighing the head down, as in the
previous cases, but to the Stomach and Spleen not nourishing the
brain; this being empty, it does not ‘sustain’ the head, which
therefore feels heavy.
Box 34.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying a feeling of heaviness
of the head.
 
BOX 34.5
 
   
 
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF
THE HEAD
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Dampness: feeling of heaviness of
the head with sudden onset
• 
 
Damp-Heat: severe feeling of heaviness of the head
with headache and thirst
• 
 
Dampness: severe feeling of heaviness of the head
with sticky taste
• 
 
Phlegm: severe feeling of heaviness of the head with
dizziness
• 
 
Qi deficiency: mild feeling of heaviness of the head
746
FEELING OF MUZZINESS
(FUZZINESS) OF THE HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
‘Muzziness’ (or ‘fuzziness’ in the USA) of the head indicates a
feeling of heaviness and cloudiness of the head 
accompanied by
difficulty in concentration; it is usually worse in the morning. As
Phlegm in the head obstructs the orifices, a feeling of muzziness is
often accompanied also by a stuffed nose, blurred vision or a
sticky taste.
A feeling of muzziness of the head is due either to Dampness
(with or without Heat) infusing upwards towards the head, or to
Phlegm in the head; if it is caused by Phlegm there will also be
dizziness.
Box 34.6
 
summarizes a feeling of muzziness of the head.
 
BOX 34.6
 
   
 
FEELING OF MUZZINESS
(FUZZINESS) OF THE HEAD
• 
 
Damp-Heat: feeling of muzziness of the head with
headache and thirst
• 
 
Dampness: feeling of muzziness of the head with
sticky taste
• 
 
Phlegm: severe feeling of muzziness of the head with
dizziness
 
Dampness and Phlegm in the head both cause a feeling
of heaviness and muzziness, but only Phlegm also
causes dizziness.
BRAIN NOISE
747
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
‘Brain noise’ should be distinguished from tinnitus: the former
is experienced inside the head whilst the latter consists of a
ringing in the ears. The four main causes of brain noise are:
 
• 
 
deficiency of the Sea of Marrow
• 
 
deficiency of Blood of the Heart and Spleen
• 
 
Damp-Heat infusing upwards
• 
 
Liver-Fire.
The brain noise caused by deficiency of the Sea of Marrow is
accompanied by dizziness, poor memory, a weak back and legs; it
is due to the deficient Marrow failing to ‘fill’ the brain.
The brain noise caused by deficiency of Blood of the Heart and
Spleen is accompanied by dizziness, palpitations, insomnia, poor
memory, a Pale tongue and a Choppy pulse; it is due to Qi and
Blood failing to rise to the head to brighten its orifices.
The brain noise due to Damp-Heat infusing upwards is
accompanied by a feeling of heaviness of the head, a dull
headache, nausea, a sticky yellow tongue coating and a Slippery-
Rapid pulse; it is due to Dampness obstructing the head’s orifices.
The brain noise due to Liver-Fire is accompanied by irritability,
hypochondrial distension, sighing and a Wiry pulse; it is due to
Liver-Fire rising to the brain.
Box 34.7
 
summarizes patterns underlying brain noise.
 
BOX 34.7
 
   
 
BRAIN NOISE
• 
 
Deficiency of the Sea of Marrow: brain noise with
dizziness, poor memory, weak back and legs
• 
 
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency: brain noise with
dizziness, palpitations, insomnia, poor memory, Pale
tongue, Choppy pulse
• 
 
Damp-Heat: brain noise with feeling of heaviness of
the head, dull headache, nausea, sticky yellow tongue
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Liver-Fire: brain noise with irritability, hypochondrial
distension, sighing, Wiry pulse
748
FEELING OF COLD OF THE HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A feeling of cold of the head is usually experienced on the
occiput and, besides an actual feeling of cold, it is characterized by
a desire to wear a scarf around the neck and an aversion to being
exposed to wind. The two main causes of a feeling of cold of the
occiput are stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel and Emptiness
and Cold of the Governing Vessel.
The feeling of cold from stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
is characterized by a cold feeling of the occiput, vertical headache,
a desire to cover one’s head with a scarf, cold hands and feet, a
greenish complexion and vomiting.
The feeling of cold of the head from deficiency and Cold of the
Governing Vessel is characterized by a cold feeling of the vertex,
occiput and upper back, cold limbs, feeling cold in general, a sore
and weak back and dull pale complexion.
Box 34.8
 
summarizes patterns underlying a feeling of cold of the
head.
 
BOX 34.8
 
   
 
FEELING OF COLD OF THE
HEAD
• 
 
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
• 
 
Governing Vessel empty and cold
FEELING OF HEAT OF THE HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
A ‘feeling of heat of the head’ includes a subjective feeling of
heat and an objective hot feeling of the head to touch. The three
main causes of hot feeling of the head are Liver-Fire blazing,
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty Heat and true Cold–false Heat.
Liver-Fire may cause a feeling of heat of the head and face which
is accompanied by irritability, a bitter taste, thirst, a Red tongue
with redder sides and a Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat may cause a feeling of
749
heat of the head accompanied by dizziness, tinnitus, five-palm
heat and a Red tongue with redder tip and no coating.
If there is a feeling of heat in the head with malar flush, sore
throat, loose stools, cold limbs and Minute pulse, this may indicate
true Cold and false Heat; this condition is quite rare.
Box 34.9
 
summarizes patterns underlying a feeling of heat of the
head.
 
BOX 34.9
 
   
 
FEELING OF HEAT OF THE
HEAD
• 
 
Liver-Fire
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
True Cold–false Heat
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE SKIN
OF THE HEAD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
Numbness/tingling is called 
Ma Mu: Ma
 
means ‘tingling’ while
Mu
 
means ‘numbness’. The two main causes of numbness/tingling
of the skin of the head are Blood deficiency and Phlegm.
Numbness is more often due to Phlegm, whereas tingling is more
often due to Blood deficiency.
Numbness/tingling of the skin of the head due to Blood
deficiency is accompanied by dizziness, poor memory, blurred
vision, palpitations, insomnia, a Pale tongue and a Choppy pulse;
it is due to Liver and Heart-Blood failing to nourish the skin of the
head.
Numbness/tingling of the skin of the head due to Phlegm is
accompanied by dizziness, blurred vision, nausea, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a Swollen tongue with sticky coating and a
Slippery pulse; it is due to Phlegm stagnating in the space between
the skin and muscles.
Box 34.10
 
summarizes patterns underlying numbness and
tingling of the head
 
750
BOX 34.10
 
   
 
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF
THE SKIN OF THE HEAD
• 
 
Blood deficiency: dizziness, blurred vision, poor
memory, palpitations, insomnia, Pale tongue, Choppy
pulse
• 
 
Phlegm: dizziness, blurred vision, nausea, feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse
ITCHY SCALP
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 55
The most common cause of an itchy scalp is Liver-Blood
deficiency and this is especially common in women. An alternative
cause is Liver- or Kidney-Yin deficiency, or both. It should not be
forgotten that Wind has a drying action on the skin, which may
also cause the scalp to be dry and itchy; this is more common in
the elderly. Other possible causes of an itchy scalp are Liver-Fire
and Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
Box 34.11
 
summarizes patterns underlying an itchy scalp.
 
BOX 34.11
 
   
 
ITCHY SCALP
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Liver-/Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Internal Wind
• 
 
Liver-Fire
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Liver channel
751
CHAPTER 35
 
FACE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
FACE
Feeling of heat of the face
Facial pain
Feeling of numbness/tingling of the face
NOSE
Blocked nose
Itchy nose
Sneezing
Runny nose
Nose ache
Nose pain
Dry nostrils
Loss of sense of smell
TEETH AND GUMS
Toothache
752
Inflamed gums
Bleeding gums
Receding gums
MOUTH AND LIPS
Mouth ulcers
Cold sores
TONGUE
Itchy tongue
Numbness of the tongue
Tongue pain
INTRODUCTION
 
WHY
 
WE ASK
Energetically, the face is an area of concentration of Yang channels.
Pure Yang needs to rise to the face to brighten the orifices so as to
promote clear vision, smell, hearing and taste. When clear Yang-Qi
fails to ascend to the face, Dampness or Phlegm often accumulate
in this area, obstructing the sense orifices and the sinuses.
Dampness and Phlegm are extremely common pathogenic factors
and, not infrequently, facial symptoms (e.g. sinus problems) are
their only manifestation. For this reason, I nearly always ask about
facial symptoms to confirm or exclude the diagnosis of Dampness
or Phlegm.
Another reason for asking about facial symptoms is to confirm
or exclude a diagnosis of Heat or Empty-Heat by asking if the
patient has experienced a feeling of heat in the face, which is the
main area where Heat or Empty-Heat manifests.
753
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I generally always ask about any feeling of heat in the face
whenever a pattern of Heat or Empty-Heat emerges from the
interrogation. It is important to remember that we should ask
about feelings of heat in the face even when the patient presents
with all the symptoms of Yang deficiency because there are many
situations when contradictory Hot and Cold symptoms appear. A
common example of this situation is in menopausal women who
suffer from hot flushes of the face occurring against a background
of a simultaneous Kidney-Yang and Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
with a
predominance of the former. For other causes of simultaneous hot
and cold feeling, see 
Chapter 43
 
.
I also ask about facial symptoms if I suspect a pattern of
Dampness or Phlegm. In such a case I always question the patient
about nasal symptoms (e.g. runny or blocked nose), and about
facial ache.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When we ask about feelings of heat in the face, we should make it
clear to the patient that, even if this symptom is experienced only
occasionally, it has a diagnostic significance. We might therefore
ask: ‘Do you occasionally feel hot in the face?’
FACE
Feeling Of Heat Of The Face
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
It is important to ask if patients suffer from a feeling of heat in
the face, even if they feel cold in general. Especially in women, the
two symptoms often coexist.
A feeling of heat in the face may be due to either Full- or Empty-
Heat of any organ. Full-Heat will manifest with a feeling of heat in
the face occurring either mostly in the daytime or throughout the
day, whereas Empty-Heat manifests with a feeling of heat in the
face occurring mostly in the afternoon and evening. (See 
Part 5
 
,
754
Chapter 55
 
).
Women
In women, more than men, a feeling of heat in the face is often
associated with contradictory Cold symptoms or signs in other
parts of the body; for example, women frequently experience a
feeling of heat in the face when their feet feel cold or they need to
urinate frequently. Women’s pathology differs from that of men
and a feeling of heat in the face with contradictory Cold symptoms
may be due to four main causes.
First of all, it may be due to a simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-
Yang and Kidney-Yin with some Empty-Heat – a situation that is
very common in menopausal women. In this case, the woman will
experience hot flushes and a feeling of heat of the face and other
Empty-Heat signs, such as night sweating and five-palm heat, but
also Cold symptoms such as cold feet and frequent urination,
which derive from Kidney-Yang deficiency. Of course, a
simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang may occur
in men too, but it is far more frequent in women; indeed in my
experience, especially in women over 40, this situation is the norm
rather than the exception.
The second cause of a feeling of heat in the face with
contradictory Cold symptoms in women is a deficiency of Blood
giving rise to some Empty-Heat; the Blood deficiency may cause
some Cold symptoms, especially cold hands, and the Empty-Heat
deriving from it may cause a feeling of heat in the face. This
pattern (i.e. Empty-Heat from Blood deficiency) occurs only in
women.
The third cause of a feeling of heat in the face with contradictory
Cold symptoms in women is a disharmony of the Penetrating
Vessel. When the Qi of the Penetrating Vessel rebels upwards, it
rushes to the face causing a feeling of facial heat and, since it fails
to descend to the legs through the descendent branch, it causes
cold feet. Again, such pathology of the Penetrating Vessel may
occur in men too but it is far more common in women.
The fourth cause of a feeling of heat in the face with
contradictory Cold symptoms is Yin Fire. Of course, Yin Fire may
occur in men as well as women.
755
Men
In men, a feeling of heat with contradictory Cold symptoms may
be due to three of the above-mentioned causes in women, that is,
simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang,
rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel and Yin Fire. The first two
of these are far less common in men than in women, however.
In men, a feeling of heat in the face with contradictory Cold
symptoms in other parts of the body is usually due to coexisting
patterns, such as Liver-Fire and Kidney-Yang deficiency.
 
A feeling of heat in the face with contradictory Cold
symptoms in women may be caused by:
• 
 
simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang
• 
 
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Yin Fire.
Facial Pain
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
The five main causes of facial pain are invasion of Wind-Heat,
invasion of Wind-Cold, Damp-Heat, Liver-Fire and Qi deficiency
with Blood stasis.
The facial pain due to invasion of Wind-Heat is characterized by
an acute onset, a severe pain on the cheeks or jaws, a feeling of
heat of the face, face feeling hot on palpation, headache, sore
throat and an aversion to cold and fever.
The facial pain due to invasion of Wind-Cold is characterized by
a spastic pain of the cheeks and jaws with sudden onset, sneezing,
runny nose, aversion to cold, fever and a Floating-Tight pulse.
The facial pain due to Damp-Heat is characterized by a severe
pain in the cheeks and forehead, and accompanied by red cheeks,
greasy skin, a sticky yellow or greenish nasal discharge and a
sticky yellow tongue coating.
The facial pain due to Liver-Fire is characterized by pain in the
cheeks and forehead, redness of the cheeks, thirst, bitter taste, a
756
Red tongue with redder sides and a Wiry-Rapid pulse.
The facial pain due to Qi deficiency and Blood stasis is
characterized by an intense, often unilateral, pain of the cheeks,
which is boring in nature and long in duration and accompanied
by a dark complexion and a Purple tongue.
Trigeminal neuralgia is, of course, a type of facial pain; it is
usually due to Liver-Fire combined with Liver- and Kidney-Yin
deficiency.
Box 35.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying facial pain.
 
BOX 35.1
 
   
 
FACIAL PAIN
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat: acute onset, severe pain of the
cheeks or jaws, feeling of heat of the face, face feels hot
on palpation, headache, sore throat, aversion to cold,
fever
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Cold: acute onset, spastic pain of
cheeks and jaws, sneezing, aversion to cold, dorsum of
hands hot, runny nose, Floating-Tight pulse
• 
 
Damp-Heat: severe pain in the cheeks and forehead,
red cheeks, greasy skin, sticky yellow or greenish nasal
discharge, sticky yellow tongue coating
• 
 
Liver-Fire: pain in the cheeks and forehead, red
cheeks, thirst, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder sides,
Wiry-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis: intense, often
unilateral pain of the cheeks, boring in nature and long
in duration, dark complexion, Purple tongue
• 
 
Liver-Fire with Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency:
trigeminal neuralgia
Feeling Of Numbness/Tingling Of The Face
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
The five main causes of numbness or tingling in the face are
invasion of external Wind, internal Liver-Wind, Stomach-Fire,
internal Wind with Phlegm and Blood deficiency.
Numbness or tingling in the face caused by invasion of external
757
Wind is characterized by a sudden onset and short duration and is
accompanied by deviation of eye and mouth.
Numbness or tingling in the face caused by internal Liver-Wind
is accompanied by headache, giddiness, tremors and a Wiry pulse.
Numbness or tingling in the face caused by Stomach-Fire is
accompanied by intense thirst, epigastric pain and a yellow tongue
coating.
Numbness or tingling in the face caused by internal Wind and
Phlegm is accompanied by deviation of the mouth, slurred speech
and hemiplegia.
Numbness or tingling in the face caused by Blood deficiency is
accompanied by a dull-pale complexion, blurred vision, dizziness,
a Pale tongue and a Choppy pulse.
Box 35.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying numbness and
tingling in the face.
 
BOX 35.2
 
   
 
FEELING OF NUMBNESS
AND TINGLING IN THE FACE
• 
 
External Wind: sudden onset, short duration,
deviation of eye and mouth
• 
 
Internal Liver-Wind: headache, giddiness, tremors,
Wiry pulse
• 
 
Stomach-Fire: intense thirst, epigastric pain, Yellow
tongue coating
• 
 
Internal Wind with Phlegm: deviation of the mouth,
slurred speech, hemiplegia
• 
 
Blood deficiency: dull-pale complexion, blurred
vision, dizziness, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse
NOSE
The nose was called in Chinese medicine 
Ming Tang
 
, which means
‘Bright Hall’, signifying that it is an area of concentration of Yang-
Qi and a place through which the clear Yang ascends to the head.
The Song dynasty’s Chen Wu Ze says: ‘
 
The nose is the opening of
the Lungs through which the five odours are detected; it is the place
758
where the Yin and Yang descend and ascend and through which the
Clear Qi flows
 
.’
 
1
 
The nose is the external orifice of the Lungs and
it is therefore closely related to breathing, smell and sound (of the
voice). The organs influencing the nose are the Lungs, Kidneys,
Spleen, Stomach, Gall-Bladder and Governing Vessel. External
Wind-Heat invades the body via the nose and mouth. The nose can
reflect pathological changes of many different organs, the balance
of Yin and Yang, Heat and Cold, Deficiency and Excess, and stasis
of Blood.
Blocked Nose
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
Excluding acute invasions of Wind, a blocked nose is usually
caused by Dampness stagnating in the nose occurring against a
background of Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency. In this case, the
nose is often also swollen and pale and the problem is
intermittent. This is a very common symptom in Western patients
and it often leads to chronic sinusitis.
A blocked nose may also be caused by Qi and Blood stagnation,
in which case the nose would be swollen, purple and with an
uneven surface.
Gall-Bladder Heat may also cause a blocked nose, in which case
the nose membranes are red and swollen and there is a sticky
yellow nasal discharge.
In a newborn baby, a blocked nose (which may affect its ability
to breast-feed) is usually due to invasion of Wind-Cold.
Box 35.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a blocked nose.
 
BOX 35.3
 
   
 
BLOCKED NOSE
• 
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency: swollen and pale
nose, problem comes and goes
• 
 
Qi and Blood stagnation: swollen and purple nose
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Heat: nose membranes red and swollen,
sticky-yellow nasal discharge
• 
 
Invasion of Wind: sudden onset, accompanied by
symptoms of Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat
759
Itchy Nose
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
Excluding acute invasions of Wind-Heat, itchiness of the nose
may be due to Lung-Heat, deficiency of the Defensive Qi and, in
children, Nose Childhood Nutritional Impairment.
When the cause is Lung-Heat, the nose is itchy, dry and red. The
most common cause of an itchy nose, however, is a deficiency of
the Lungs’ Defensive Qi causing itchiness of the nose, sneezing
and a profuse, watery nasal discharge coming in bouts. This was
called in Chinese medicine 
Bi Jiu
 
and it corresponds closely to
allergic rhinitis in Western medicine. In my experience, however,
the symptoms of allergic rhinitis with itchy nose, sneezing and
profuse watery discharge are due also to a deficiency of Kidney-
Yang and the Governing Vessel.
In small children, an itchy nose may be a symptom of Nose
Childhood Nutritional Impairment. In such cases the itchiness is
accompanied by scabs or ulcers on the nose, a watery yellow nasal
discharge, dry skin and hot hands and feet, and the child has a
tendency to pick his or her nose. This condition is usually caused
by irregular feeding and poor-quality breast milk, which leads to
Damp-Heat in the nose.
Box 35.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying itchy nose.
 
BOX 35.4
 
   
 
ITCHY NOSE
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat: sudden onset, accompanied
by symptoms of an external invasion
• 
 
Lung-Heat: itchy, dry and red nose
• 
 
Deficiency of Lungs’ Defensive-Qi system, Kidney-
Yang and Governing Vessel: sneezing, profuse, watery
nasal discharge coming in bouts
• 
 
Nose Childhood Nutritional Impairment: scabs,
ulcers, watery yellow nasal discharge, dry skin, hot
hands and feet, nose picking
Sneezing
760
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
In acute cases, sneezing is always due to invasion of Wind, which
may be either Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat although the former is
more common. The sneezing is accompanied by aversion to cold,
shivers, fever, body aches and a Floating pulse. Other
manifestations depend on whether the cause is Wind-Cold or
Wind-Heat.
Chronic sneezing is always a sign of allergic rhinitis which, in
Chinese medicine, usually occurs against a background of Lung-Qi
deficiency. In my opinion, there will also be a deficiency of the
Kidney Defensive-Qi system, as well as of the Governing Vessel. In
such cases, sneezing is accompanied by allergy to house-dust
mites or pollen, itchy nose, tiredness, sweating, 
slight shortness of
breath, a Pale tongue and a Weak pulse.
Box 35.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying sneezing.
 
BOX 35.5
 
   
 
SNEEZING
• 
 
Invasion of Wind: sudden onset, aversion to cold,
shivers, fever, Floating pulse
• 
 
Deficiency of Lung-Qi, Kidney Defensive-Qi system
and Governing Vessel: allergies, itchy nose, tiredness,
sweating, slight shortness of breath, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse
Runny Nose
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
 
.
A runny nose with an acute onset is due to an invasion of Wind,
which may be Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat, but it is especially likely
to occur with Wind-Cold. The severity of this symptom reflects
directly the severity of the Cold (as opposed to Wind).
A chronic, runny nose with a thick, sticky discharge, which is
usually yellow, is generally due to Damp-Heat in the Stomach
channel (often corresponding to sinusitis in Western medicine).
A chronic, profusely runny nose with a clear, watery discharge
indicates a deficiency of Lung-Qi with Empty-Cold (often
corresponding to allergic rhinitis in Western medicine). Such a
761
profuse, watery discharge may also be due to a deficiency of Yang
of both the Lungs and Kidneys and of the Governing Vessel (see
above).
Box 35.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a runny nose.
 
BOX 35.6
 
   
 
RUNNY NOSE
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind: acute onset
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach channel: chronic, with
thick sticky nasal discharge
• 
 
Lung-Qi deficiency with Empty-Cold, deficiency of
Yang of the Governing Vessel: chronic, with watery white
nasal discharge
Nose Ache
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
Excluding acute invasions of Wind-Heat, nose ache may be due
to Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs, Lung-Qi deficiency or Lung- and
Spleen-Qi deficiency.
Nose ache due to Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs is accompanied by a
sticky yellow nasal discharge, a redness of the nose and a cough
with expectoration of sticky yellow phlegm.
When due to Lung-Qi deficiency, the nose ache is accompanied
by a watery nasal discharge and spontaneous sweating, a weak
voice and an Empty pulse.
Chronic Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with retention of
Dampness in the nose may also cause nose ache, in which case
there is a sticky white nasal discharge and often loss of the sense
of smell.
Box 35.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying nose ache.
 
BOX 35.7
 
   
 
NOSE ACHE
• 
 
Acute invasion of Wind-Heat: nose ache with aversion
to cold, fever, body aches, Floating pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs: nose ache with sticky
yellow nasal discharge, red nose, cough with
expectoration of sticky yellow phlegm
762
• 
 
Lung-Qi deficiency: dull nose ache, watery nasal
discharge, spontaneous sweating, weak voice, Empty
pulse
• 
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness: nose
ache with sticky nasal discharge, loss of sense of smell
Nose Pain
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 55
Excluding acute invasions of Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat, nose
pain may be due to Lung-Heat, Damp-Heat, Lung-Yin deficiency
with Empty-Heat, or nasal cancer.
Lung-Heat may cause nose pain in acute conditions when the
pathogenic factor enters the Qi level; it is accompanied by fever, a
red face and nose, a cough with yellow phlegm, thirst and a Rapid-
Overflowing pulse. When nose pain is caused by Damp-Heat, it is
accompanied by a sticky yellow discharge, cheek pain and a feeling
of heaviness and heat in the face. When caused by Empty-Heat of
the Lungs, nose pain is dull and accompanied by a dryness and
feeling of heat in the nose, with nasal scabs and redness, night
sweating, and a Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse. It should be
borne in mind that nose pain may also be caused by carcinoma of
the nose, in which case the nose pain extends to the head and
there is nosebleed with a swelling of the nasal mucosa.
Box 35.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying nose pain.
 
BOX 35.8
 
   
 
NOSE PAIN
• 
 
Acute invasion of Wind-Cold: acute nose pain,
aversion to cold, fever, sneezing, runny nose with white
discharge, Floating-Tight pulse
• 
 
Acute invasion of Wind-Heat: acute nose pain,
aversion to cold, fever, sticky yellow nasal discharge,
sore throat, body aches, Floating-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Lung-Heat: acute nose pain after an invasion of
external Wind, fever, red face and nose, cough with
expectoration of yellow phlegm, thirst, Rapid-
Overflowing pulse
763
• 
 
Damp-Heat: nose pain, red cheeks, sticky yellow nasal
discharge, cheek pain, feeling of heat in the face and of
heaviness of the head
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: dull nose pain,
scabs on the nose, dry nose, malar flush, dry cough,
night sweating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
• 
 
Cancer of the nose: nose pain extending to the head,
nosebleed, swelling of nasal mucosa
Dry Nostrils
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
 
.
‘Dry nostrils’ refers to dryness of the nasal mucosa.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat can cause dryness of the
nostrils spreading to the throat. It is accompanied by a dry cough,
night sweating and five-palm heat.
Dryness of the nostrils also appears in the Stomach-Heat pattern
at the Qi level within the Four Levels identification of patterns,
together with fever, thirst and sweating.
Dryness of the nostrils may also be caused by Blood stasis, in
which case the nose bridge is dry and purple, there is thirst
without desire to swallow, dark rings under the eyes and a dark
complexion.
Chronic Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency may also cause dryness
of the internal mucosa of the nose, a loss of the sense of smell and
often a turbid discharge from the eyes.
Box 35.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dry nostrils.
 
BOX 35.9
 
   
 
DRY NOSTRILS
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty Heat: dry nostrils,
dry throat, dry cough, night sweating, five-palm heat
• 
 
Stomach Heat at the Qi Level: dry nostrils, fever,
thirst, sweating
• 
 
Blood stasis: dry nostrils and nose bridge, purple nose
bridge, dark rings under the eyes, dark complexion,
thirst with no desire to swallow
• 
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency: dry nostrils, loss of
764
sense of smell, turbid discharge from the eyes
Loss Of Sense Of Smell
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 58
The most common cause of loss of sense of smell is a deficiency
of Lung- and Spleen-Qi with an inability of the clear Qi to rise to
the nose. Cases of acute and temporary loss of smell are due to
invasion of Wind.
An inability to smell fragrant smells when the nasal mucosa are
swollen and dark red is due to Damp-Heat in the nose.
Loss of the sense of smell in the course of a serious illness
always indicates a poor prognosis.
Box 35.10
 
summarizes patterns underlying the loss of sense of
smell.
 
BOX 35.10
 
   
 
LOSS OF SENSE OF SMELL
• 
 
Lung-Qi and Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind (acute and temporary loss)
• 
 
Damp-Heat
TEETH AND GUMS
The teeth are an extension of the bones and as such are governed
by the Kidneys while the gums are under the influence of the
Stomach. More specifically, the gums of the upper jaw are under
the influence of the Large Intestine, and those of the lower jaw are
under the influence of the Stomach. The state of the teeth and
gums therefore reflects the state of the Kidneys, Stomach and
Large Intestine. For example, tooth cavities and loss of teeth may
reflect a Kidney deficiency, whereas receding gums may reflect a
Stomach deficiency.
Toothache
765
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
As a general rule, a Full condition causes a toothache that is
constant and intense, whereas an Empty condition causes a
toothache that comes and goes and is mild. Toothache that is
worse in the evening and better in the morning points to Yin
deficiency; one that is better in the evening and worse in the
morning indicates Yang deficiency. As far as channels are
concerned, the upper teeth are influenced by the Large Intestine
channel and the lower ones by the Stomach channel.
Excluding external invasions of Wind, which cause an acute and
temporary toothache with aversion to cold, toothache may be
caused by Stomach-Fire, Toxic 
Heat, Heat in the Spleen and Heart,
Damp-Heat, ‘Wind-Cold in the Brain’ or Stomach and Spleen
deficiency.
Stomach-Fire is a common cause of toothache, in which the
toothache is accompanied by thirst, swollen cheeks, dry stools,
mental restlessness, a Red tongue with a dry yellow coating in the
centre and a Rapid-Overflowing pulse. When Stomach-Fire
combines with Toxic Heat, the toothache is very intense, there may
be a fever and the tongue would have a thick, dry yellow coating
and red points; this may correspond to a tooth abscess in Western
medicine. Toothache may also be caused by Heat in the Spleen and
Heart, in which case there may also be bleeding gums, insomnia
and mental restlessness.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach is also a frequent cause of toothache;
it is usually accompanied by swelling of the gums and a sticky
taste in the mouth. The relative importance of the toothache and
the gum swelling gives an indication of the prevalence of Heat or
Dampness: if the gum swelling predominates over the tooth-ache,
Dampness is predominant; if the toothache pre-dominates over
the gum swelling, Heat is predominant.
A severe toothache that extends to the head is due to ‘Wind-Cold
in the Brain’ and Blood stasis. Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
may cause a chronic, dull toothache that comes and goes and
receding gums; this may be due to excessive consumption of sour
foods.
Other teeth symptoms include loose teeth and grinding teeth,
and other gum symptoms include inflamed gums, bleeding gums
766
and receding gums. For the diagnostic significance of these
symptoms see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 35.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying toothache.
 
BOX 35.11
 
   
 
TOOTHACHE
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind: acute toothache with
headache and aversion to cold
• 
 
Stomach-Fire: intense toothache, thirst, swollen
cheeks, dry stools, mental restlessness, Red tongue,
Rapid-Overflowing pulse
• 
 
Toxic Heat: very intense toothache, very swollen
cheeks, fever, Red tongue with red points and thick, dry
yellow coating
• 
 
Spleen- and Heart-Heat: toothache, bleeding gums,
insomnia, mental restlessness
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach: toothache with swelling
of the gums and sticky taste
• 
 
‘Wind-Cold in the Brain’ with Blood stasis: severe
toothache extending to the head
• 
 
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency: chronic, dull
toothache with receding gums
Inflamed Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Stomach-Heat is a common cause of inflamed gums; this may be
either Full-Heat or Empty-Heat from Stomach-Yin deficiency.
Other causes include invasion of external Wind-Heat in acute
cases, and two conditions that affect children and are
characterized by swollen and inflamed gums.
Bleeding Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
The gums may bleed either from deficient Spleen-Qi not holding
Blood, with tiredness, poor appetite and loose stools, or from Heat.
This may be Stomach Full- or Empty-Heat, or Empty-Heat from
767
Kidney-Yin deficiency. In Stomach Full-Heat there is a feeling of
heat and thirst, in Empty-Heat there is thirst with a desire to drink
in small sips, and in Kidney-Yin deficiency there is tinnitus,
dizziness, night sweating and a malar flush.
Box 35.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying bleeding gums.
 
BOX 35.12
 
   
 
BLEEDING GUMS
• 
 
Deficient Spleen-Qi not holding Blood: bleeding
gums, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools
• 
 
Stomach Heat: inflamed, bleeding gums, feeling of
heat, thirst
• 
 
Stomach Empty-Heat: bleeding gums, dry mouth,
desire to drink in small sips
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: bleeding
gums, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, malar flush
Receding Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Receding gums may be due to a general deficiency of Qi and
Blood, Stomach-Heat or Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Qi and Blood deficiency is accompanied by tiredness poor
appetite, loose stools and a pale complexion. In Stomach-Heat
there is thirst, a red face and a feeling of heat, while with Kidney-
Yin deficiency there is dizziness, a malar flush and night sweating.
It should be noted that ‘loose teeth’ are a prominent symptom of
Kidney deficiency patterns; however, teeth 
become loose generally
because of gum disease. It can therefore be assumed that the
Kidneys influence the gums also.
Box 35.13
 
summarizes the patterns underlying receding gums.
 
BOX 35.13
 
   
 
RECEDING GUMS
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency: tiredness, poor appetite,
loose stools, pale complexion
• 
 
Stomach Heat: receding and inflamed gums, thirst,
red face, feeling of heat
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: receding
768
gums, dizziness, tinnitus, malar flush, night sweating
MOUTH AND LIPS
The mouth and lips are related to the Spleen. 
Chapter 37
 
of the
‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘The mouth and lips are the orifice of the Spleen’
 
.
2
 
Chapter 17
 
of the same book says: 
‘The Spleen opens into the mouth.
When the Spleen is harmonized the mouth can distinguish the five
flavours’
 
.
 
3
The mouth and lips are primarily influenced by the Stomach and
Large Intestine channels; the Liver channel wraps around the lips
and so do the Penetrating and Directing Vessels. Internally, other
channels flow to the inside of the mouth and the tongue and, in
particular, the Heart Connecting channel, the Kidney Main and
Divergent channel and the Spleen main channel.
The saliva is mostly under the control of the Stomach, Spleen
and Kidneys and a normal moisture of the mouth indicates a
normal state of the Body Fluids.
Mouth Ulcers
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Recurrent mouth ulcers are a relatively common symptom and
the most important differentiation is that between ulcers deriving
from a Full condition and those deriving from an Empty condition.
As a general rule, mouth ulcers that recur very frequently or are
even almost permanent indicate a Full condition, whereas ulcers
that come and go usually indicate an Empty condition.
The most common cause of ulcers is Heat. Full-Heat should be
differentiated from Empty-Heat: in general mouth ulcers from
Full-Heat are very painful and with a red rim around them,
whereas those from Empty-Heat are less painful and with a pale
rim around them.
Mouth ulcers should be further differentiated according to their
location: ulcers on the gums are due to Full-Heat or Empty-Heat of
the Stomach or Large Intestine (the Stomach if on the lower gum
769
and the Large Intestine if on the upper gum); ulcers on the tongue
are usually related to the Heart channel, especially if they occur on
the tip; ulcers on the inside of the cheeks are usually related to the
Stomach channel. In women, and especially in pregnancy or after
childbirth, a disharmony of the Directing Vessel may cause mouth
ulcers; typically these occur on the floor of the mouth under the
tongue.
The most common cause of mouth ulcers is Stomach-Heat in
which case the ulcers have a red rim around them, they are inside
the cheeks or on the lower gums and are associated with thirst,
epigastric pain and a yellow tongue coating in the centre. Another
common type of mouth ulcer is that from Kidney-Yin deficiency
with Empty-Heat, in which case the ulcers have a pale rim around
them and are aggravated by overwork and lack of sleep; other
symptoms and signs would include a dry throat at night, night
sweating and a Red tongue without coating.
Mouth ulcers may also arise from a severe Stomach- and Spleen-
Qi deficiency and a deficiency of the Original Qi: the depletion of
the Original Qi (after a chronic illness or from overwork) creates
the conditions for the pathological arousal of the Minister Fire,
which flows upwards to the mouth causing mouth ulcers. These
ulcers are intermittent, have pale rims, are aggravated by overwork
and are associated with other manifestations of Qi deficiency. For
the diagnostic significance of other types of mouth ulcers see 
Part
5
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Box 35.14
 
summarizes the patterns underlying mouth ulcers.
 
BOX 35.14
 
   
 
MOUTH ULCERS
• 
 
Stomach Full-Heat: very painful, red-rimmed ulcers
on the gums or on the inside of the cheeks
• 
 
Stomach Empty-Heat: pale-rimmed ulcers on the
lower gums
• 
 
Large Intestine Full- or Empty-Heat: ulcers on the
upper gum
• 
 
Heart-Fire or Heart Empty-Heat: ulcers on the tip of
the tongue
• 
 
Disharmony of Directing Vessel: ulcers in pregnancy
under the tongue
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency or Original-Qi deficiency: pale-
770
rimmed ulcers aggravated by overwork
Cold Sores
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.
Cold sores are generally related to the Stomach channel and
reflect Full-Heat, Empty-Heat or Qi deficiency. When due to
Stomach-Heat, the cold sores appear suddenly and cause a
burning pain; when due to Stomach Empty-Heat, they come in
bouts, recurring over many years; when due to Qi deficiency, they
occur in bouts over a long period of time, are usually pale in colour
and are aggravated by overwork.
(For other signs related to the lips, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 60
 
.)
TONGUE
Itchy Tongue
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
Itchy tongue is generally due to Heat and this can be either
external Heat in the form of Wind-Heat or Heart-Heat, which may
be Full or Empty.
Numbness Of The Tongue
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
Numbness of the tongue may be due to Heart-Blood deficiency
or to Spleen-Qi deficiency. In Full conditions, numbness of the
tongue may be due to Phlegm obstructing the orifices, to Liver-
Wind or to chronic Blood stasis.
Tongue Pain
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 60
Pain of the tongue is always due to Heat and the most common
cause is Heart-Fire or Heart Empty-Heat. Liver-Fire or Phlegm-Fire
in the Heart may also cause tongue pain.
771
NOTES
1. 
Cited in Xue, Ma Zhong. Great Treatise of Chinese
Diagnostic Methods (
Zhong Guo Yi Xue Zhen Fa Da Quan
 
). Jinan: Shandong Science Publishing House,
1989; 56.
2. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:78 First published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 50.
772
CHAPTER 36
 
THROAT AND
NECK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND NECK
THROAT
Sore throat
Dry throat
Itchy throat
Hoarse voice
Feeling of obstruction in the throat
Swollen and red tonsils
NECK
Goitre
Painful or stiff neck
INTRODUCTION
773
Chinese medicine talks about the ‘throat’ in general without
distinguishing the pharynx (related to both respiratory and
digestive systems) from the larynx (pertaining to the respiratory
system). There are, however, signs that the ancient Chinese
doctors were aware of such a differentiation. For example, even as
early as 100
BC
 
, the ‘Spiritual Axis’ said in 
Chapter 69
 
: 
‘The throat
is the passage for food and drink; the throat is also where Qi goes
up and down’
 
.
 
1
 
It is interesting that the Chinese text uses two
different terms in this sentence: 
Yan-hou
 
for the passage of food
and 
Hou-long
 
for the passage of Qi; both are translated as ‘throat’
in modern texts.
Bearing in mind the dual function of the throat in respect of
respiratory and digestive systems, one can generally differentiate
two broad types of throat problems: one related to the respiratory
system and in Chinese medicine to the Lungs and Kidney
channels, the other related to the digestive system and in Chinese
medicine to the Stomach and Large Intestine channels (see next
section). In adults, chronic sore throats are more commonly
related to the Lung and Kidney channels, and in children more
commonly to the Stomach and Large Intestine channels.
With regard to Heat and Cold, the throat is prone only to Heat
(whether Full or Empty) and does not have any Cold patterns.
WHY
 
WE ASK
I generally ask about throat symptoms to confirm either a pattern
of Heat (because the throat is an area of concentration of Heat) or
a pattern of Qi stagnation.
I usually ask about neck symptoms to confirm the presence of a
Liver pattern such as Liver-Qi stagnation or Liver-Yang rising,
which, barring invasion of external Cold, comprise the most
common causes of chronic neck ache.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
It is useful to ask about throat symptoms when there is Heat (Full
or Empty) or Qi stagnation. If no earlier mention of throat
774
symptoms has been made, I generally ask about them towards the
end of the consultation. I always ask about the throat when I
suspect a pattern of rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel.
HOW
 
WE ASK
I usually ask patients whether they experience a feeling of
tightness in the throat or a sensation of having a lump in the
throat. If the patients speak of discomfort in the neck, it is
important to ask them to point clearly to the area involved: the
sides of the neck are influenced by the Gall-Bladder channel and
often Liver patterns, while the back of the neck is influenced by
the Bladder channel (see below).
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE
THROAT AND NECK
The throat and the front of the neck form an area in which
practically all channels converge (see 
Fig 10.1 on p. 109
 
). With the
single exception of the Bladder channel, 11 of the 12 channels
course either through the front or the side of the throat. Of the
eight Extraordinary Vessels, six go through the centre or the side of
the throat; the exceptions are the Governing Vessel and the Girdle
Vessel. Thus, being influenced by so many channels and therefore
Internal Organs, the throat reflects clearly conditions of Yin–Yang,
Heat–Cold and Deficiency–Excess and is an important diagnostic
area. The throat is influenced particularly by the Lungs, Stomach,
Large Intestine, Liver, Kidneys and Directing Vessel channels.
THROAT
Sore Throat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Both acute and chronic sore throat are due to Heat, which may
be Full or Empty; however, we should always check this symptom
with the findings from observation, especially in acute cases. A
775
redness of the pharynx confirms the presence of Heat, especially
Full-Heat.
When diagnosing sore throat, the first thing to establish is
whether it is of external or internal origin, and the clinical
significance of this symptom will therefore be analysed according
to this distinction.
Sore throat of external origin
A sore throat of external origin has a sudden onset and short
duration. In external invasions of Wind a sore throat generally
points to Wind-Heat rather than Wind-Cold, especially if it is very
severe. Other symptoms would include aversion to cold, a fever (or
body hot to touch), headache, sneezing and a Floating-Rapid pulse.
Sore throat of internal origin
A sore throat from internal origin is usually due to Heat, which
may be Full or Empty. In general, the sore throat from Full-Heat is
very severe and the throat is red and swollen, whereas that from
Empty-Heat is less severe, worse in the evening and associated
with dryness. However, a chronic sore throat may also arise from a
long-standing Yin deficiency, without Empty-Heat.
In adults, the most common chronic sore throat is that from
Kidney- or Lung-Yin deficiency, or both, with Empty-Heat; this sore
throat is not very severe, is worse in the evening, and is associated
with dryness of the throat and other Yin deficiency manifestations.
A chronic sore throat may also be caused simply by Qi and Yin
deficiency without Empty-Heat; in this case the sore throat is mild,
it comes in bouts, caused or aggravated by overwork, and is
associated with other Qi and Yin deficiency manifestations.
In some cases patients complain of a ‘sore throat’ that comes
and goes according to the emotional state; if there is no redness
inside the throat and there are no other signs of Heat, this may be
due to stagnation of Qi (of the Liver or Lungs) from emotional
problems.
In children, external Wind-Heat has a stronger tendency than
Wind-Cold to cause interior Heat. If not cleared properly after the
initial stages, it is very likely to give rise to residual pathogenic
factors. When a child presents with a recurrent, chronic sore
776
throat, the two most common causes are either residual Heat in
the Lung channel following an invasion of Wind-Heat or an
accumulation of Heat in the Stomach and Large Intestine channels
due to retention of food. In the case of residual Heat in the Lung
channel, the child will present with a history of repeated invasion
of Wind-Heat, which has usually been treated with antibiotics;
other manifestations may include a cough, thirst, a feeling of heat,
red cheeks and disturbed sleep. In the case of sore throat from
accumulation of Heat in the Stomach and Large Intestine
channels, there will be no history of repeated invasions of Wind-
Heat, but rather one of successive digestive upsets such as
vomiting and regurgitation of food; other manifestations may
include abdominal pain, constipation, epigastric pain and
disturbed sleep.
Box 36.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying sore throats.
 
BOX 36.1
 
   
 
SORE THROAT
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind-Heat: sore throat with acute
onset, with aversion to cold, fever or hot body, Floating-
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Full-Heat in Stomach and Intestines: severe sore
throat with swelling and redness
• 
 
Kidney-/Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat:
chronic mild sore throat with dryness
• 
 
Severe Qi and Yin deficiency: chronic, intermittent
mild sore throat aggravated by overwork
• 
 
Residual Heat in Lung channel or Heat in Stomach
and Large Intestine channel: recurrent, chronic sore
throat in children with a history of Wind invasion or
digestive upset
• 
 
Qi stagnation (Liver or Lungs): chronic ‘sore throat’
that comes and goes, without redness
Dry Throat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Excluding external invasions of Wind-Heat which may cause a
777
dry throat, the most common cause of chronic dryness of the
throat is a deficiency of Yin of the Lung or Kidneys, or both. In
fact, in these situations, a dry throat is an important symptom
confirming the diagnosis of Yin deficiency. A chronic dryness of
the throat from Full-Heat may be related to the Stomach channel,
but this is much less common than the former type.
Chronic dryness of the throat may also be related to the Liver
and Gall-Bladder channels and be caused by Heat in the Liver and
Gall-Bladder or by the Lesser Yang syndrome within the Six Stages
or the Gall-Bladder Heat pattern at the Qi level within the Four
Levels.
Box 36.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dry throat.
 
BOX 36.2
 
   
 
DRY THROAT
• 
 
External invasion of Wind-Heat
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Lesser Yang pattern (Six Stages)
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Heat (Four Levels)
Itchy Throat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
Itchiness of the throat with sudden onset is always related to
invasion of Wind, which may be Wind-Cold, Wind-Heat or Wind-
Dryness. Chronic itchiness of the throat is usually due to Lung-Yin
deficiency or Lung Dryness; in this case the itchy feeling of the
throat is worse in the evening and is associated with a desire to
drink water in small sips.
Hoarse Voice
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
 
.
In acute cases, hoarse voice is due either to external invasion of
Wind-Heat or to Lung-Heat, which may develop from such an
778
invasion. In invasions of external Wind the presence of a hoarse
voice by itself indicates Wind-Heat rather than Wind-Cold because
the throat is a place where Heat easily accumulates. In such cases,
a hoarse voice is accompanied by a sore throat, aversion to cold,
fever, a Red tongue in the front or sides and a Floating-Rapid
pulse.
A hoarse voice may also occur with acute Lung-Heat after an
invasion of Wind-Heat. In such a case, the hoarse voice will be
accompanied by a sore throat, a feeling of blockage of the throat,
cough with scanty yellow sputum, chest pain, a Red tongue with
dry yellow coating and an Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
In chronic cases, by far the most common cause of a hoarse
voice is a deficiency of Yin of both Lungs and 
Kidneys. In such
cases, a hoarse voice is accompanied by a dry throat at night, an
itchy throat, weak voice, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, a
tongue without coating and a Floating-Empty pulse. This pattern is
more common in the elderly.
A less common cause of a chronic hoarse voice (also in the
elderly) is an accumulation of Phlegm and Blood stasis in the
throat, in which case there will also be a sore throat, a feeling of
obstruction of the throat, thickening of the vocal chords, nodules
on the vocal chords, a swelling of the throat, a Purple tongue and a
Wiry pulse.
Box 36.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a hoarse voice.
 
BOX 36.3
 
   
 
HOARSE VOICE
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat: sore throat, sudden onset,
aversion to cold, fever, Red tongue, Floating-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Lung-Heat: sore throat, feeling of blockage of the
throat, cough with scanty yellow sputum, chest pain,
Red tongue with a dry yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: dry throat at night,
itchy throat, weak voice, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse
• 
 
Phlegm and Blood stasis in the throat: sore throat,
feeling of obstruction of the throat, thickening of the
vocal chords, nodules on the vocal chords, swelling of
the throat, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse
779
Feeling Of Obstruction In The Throat
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
The feeling of obstruction in the throat may be compared to
having a piece of meat lodged in the throat; it cannot be swallowed
down or coughed up, but there is no redness, no pain and no
swelling of the throat. It is commonly referred to as the Plum
Stone Syndrome, although the first reference to this syndrome in
the ‘Discussion of Cold Induced Diseases’ mentions a piece of
meat rather than a plum stone.
This symptom is nearly always caused by a stagnation of Qi due
to emotional problems; modern Chinese textbooks always relate
this to stagnation of Liver-Qi and to emotional problems such as
anger, repressed anger or frustration, but it may also be due to
Lung-Qi stagnation and failure of Lung-Qi to descend caused by
emotions such as worry, sadness or grief. Whatever the emotion or
the channel involved, when due to Qi stagnation the feeling of a
foreign body in the throat comes and goes according to the
emotional state of the patient.
A feeling of obstruction in the throat may be due also to
rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel. In such a case, it would be
accompanied by symptoms throughout the course of this channel
such as abdominal fullness or pain, or both, menstrual
irregularities in women, tightness of the chest, anxiety and
palpitations.
However, stagnation of Qi and rebellious Qi of the Penetrating
Vessel are not the only possible causes of a feeling of obstruction
in the throat. This symptom may also be caused by deficiency of
Yin of the Lung or Kidneys, or both. In this case, the feeling of a
foreign body in the throat is less severe than in the previous case,
it is worse in the evening and is aggravated by overwork.
Box 36.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a feeling of
obstruction in the throat.
 
BOX 36.4
 
   
 
FEELING OF OBSTRUCTION
IN THE THROAT
• 
 
Liver- or Lung-Qi stagnation: severe, comes and goes
according to mood
• 
 
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel: worse in
780
pregnancy or before menstruation, with abdominal
fullness/pain, chest tightness, anxiety, palpitations
• 
 
Lung-/Kidney-Yin deficiency: mild, worse in the
evening, aggravated by overwork
Swollen And Red Tonsils
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
 
; 
Symptoms and signs,
 
Chapter 59
 
.
The tonsils are influenced by the Lung, Stomach and Large
Intestine channels and are prone to Heat or Toxic Heat.
Acute conditions
In acute conditions, redness and swelling of the tonsils may occur
with an invasion of Wind-Heat; indeed, this sign always indicates
that the pathogenic factor is Wind-Heat rather than Wind-Cold.
However, swelling and redness of the tonsils with an invasion of
Wind also indicate that there is Toxic Heat of external origin (this
is an important diagnostic differentiation in the choice of herbs as
we will need to address the Toxic Heat).
Chronic conditions
In chronic conditions, redness and swelling of the tonsils indicates
either Heat (which may be Full or Empty) or Toxic Heat. These may
affect the Stomach or 
Large Intestine channels. In children,
chronic tonsillitis is nearly always related to residual Heat or Toxic
Heat (following repeated invasions of Wind-Heat, especially if
treated with antibiotics). In adults, chronic tonsillitis is often due
to Empty-Heat in the Lung or Stomach channel, or both.
Case history 36.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying chronic
tonsillitis.
 
Case History 36.1
A 24-year-old woman complained of chronic tonsillitis
suffering two or three bouts each year since the age of
5. Six weeks prior to the consultation she had had her
tonsils removed and she had been much worse since
781
then, suffering from sore throat, tiredness, swollen
glands, headaches, thirst, a feeling of heaviness and a
congested feeling in the sinuses. Her pulse was Slippery
on the whole, but Weak on the right. Her tongue was
Red in the front, slightly Thin and with a sticky yellow
coating.
Diagnosis:
This is a typical example of residual pathogenic factor
and specifically Toxic Heat in the throat. This is an
unusual case as the residual pathogenic factor stems
from an operation, whereas it normally develops after a
febrile disease. Toxic Heat is manifested by the swollen
glands, the sore throat, a feeling of heaviness, the
headache, the Slippery pulse and the Red tongue with a
thick, sticky yellow coating. Obviously, Toxic Heat is
only the acute, recent cause of her problem and there is
an underlying deficiency of Stomach and Spleen,
probably stemming from the chronic tonsillitis which
she had suffered from since childhood. The deficiency
of Stomach and Spleen is manifested by the tiredness
and Weak pulse.
Treatment principle:
This is a very good example of a condition characterized
by a mixture of Deficiency and Excess: the residual
Toxic Heat is an Excess, acute condition and it
constitutes the Manifestation (
Biao
 
), whereas the
deficiency of Stomach and Spleen is an Empty, chronic
condition and it constitutes the Root (
Ben
 
). In such
cases, one should have a clear idea about the priorities
of treatment, that is, whether one should treat the
Excess, acute condition first or the deficient, chronic
condition first. The pulse, tongue and severity of the
symptoms are important guidelines to assist us in
choosing the proper treatment principle. In this case, it
is clear that the residual Toxic Heat should be
eliminated first because the symptoms are acute, the
pulse is Slippery and the tongue has a thick, sticky
782
yellow coating.
Treatment:
The prescription used was a variation of the formula Li
Yan Cha 
Benefiting the Throat Tea
 
, which is specific for
eliminating Toxic Heat from the throat.
Box 36.5
 
summarizes patterns underlying swollen and red
tonsils.
 
BOX 36.5
 
   
 
SWOLLEN AND RED
TONSILS
Acute
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat
Chronic
• 
 
Stomach and Large Intestine Heat
• 
 
Stomach and Large Intestine Empty-Heat
• 
 
Toxic Heat in Stomach and Large Intestine
• 
 
Residual Heat or Toxic Heat
• 
 
Empty-Heat of Lung and Stomach channels
NECK
Goitre
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 59
 
.
A discussion of goitre is relevant in interrogation as well as
observation when there is a past history of it, orwhen the patient
has had a goitre but has undergone an operation to remove it.
Goitre is always by itself a sign of Phlegm. Very frequently, the
pathology of Phlegm is combined with Qi stagnation in the throat;
this is not always related to the Liver but may be related to the
Lungs and Stomach too. In such cases, it is accompanied by
783
irritability, 
depression, and variation in the goitre size according to
mood. In chronic cases, there is always an underlying deficiency of
Qi or Yin, or both, which may cause the goitre to go up and down.
Goitre is closely related to the Liver and Lung channel and Liver-
Fire combined with Phlegm is a frequent cause of it. Finally, in
chronic cases, Phlegm may also combine with Blood stasis to cause
goitre. In case of Liver-Fire and Blood stasis the goitre would be
hard; in all other cases, it would feel soft to palpation.
Box 36.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying goitre.
 
BOX 36.6
 
   
 
GOITRE
• 
 
Phlegm: large, soft goitre
• 
 
Qi stagnation with Phlegm: soft goitre with irritability,
depression, goitre size varying according to mood
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Phlegm: small soft goitre of
variable size, tiredness
• 
 
Liver-Fire with Phlegm: hard goitre, irritability
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis with Phlegm: hard goitre, Purple
tongue
Painful Or Stiff Neck
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 62
The most common cause of a painful or stiff neck is retention of
Wind and Dampness in the muscles of the neck; this is a type of
Painful Obstruction Syndrome. It is very common in cold and
damp climates and varies with the weather.
Another common cause of a painful or stiff neck is Liver-Qi
stagnation and this is usually due to stress, frustration and
resentment being held in. It comes and goes according to the
mood and is not affected by the weather. Liver-Yang rising or
Liver-Wind may also cause a stiff or painful neck and this is more
common in the elderly; it is often, but not necessarily, associated
with hypertension.
A less common cause of a stiff or mildly painful neck is a Kidney
deficiency, being due to Kidney-Yang not nourishing the Bladder
channel in the neck. This causes only chronic stiff neck and again
784
is seen usually only in the elderly.
Invasion of external Wind-Cold causes an acute stiff neck with
all the other characteristic symptoms of external invasions such as
sudden onset, aversion to cold and sneezing.
Box 36.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying painful or stiff
neck.
 
BOX 36.7
 
   
 
PAINFUL OR STIFF NECK
• 
 
Wind and Dampness in the muscles of the neck: pain
and stiffness, reacting to weather
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: comes and goes according to the
mood, not reacting to weather
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: intense stiffness, dizziness,
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse, often with
hypertension (in elderly)
• 
 
Liver-Wind: stiffness, tremor, often with hypertension
(in elderly)
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: chronic, more common in the
elderly
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Cold: sudden onset, acute,
accompanied by aversion to cold and sneezing
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:125 First published c.
100
BC
785
CHAPTER 37
 
BODY
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ACHES IN THE WHOLE BODY
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
LOWER BACKACHE
NUMBNESS/TINGLING
ITCHING
LOSS OF WEIGHT
OBESITY
INTRODUCTION
Questions about the body concern mostly pain and numbness.
Chest and abdomen are discussed in 
Chapter 38
 
and limbs in
Chapter 39
 
.
WHY
 
WE ASK
Apart from the question regarding lower backache, which I ask
every time I suspect a Kidney deficiency, questions about the body
concern mostly symptoms affecting the whole body which do not
786
pertain to any specific area, such as pain, numbness or itching of
the whole body or loss of weight or obesity.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Apart from the question about backache, I generally ask questions
about the body only if relevant. In particular, the question about
gain or loss of weight is important to give us an idea of the state of
Blood and Yin and of the Stomach and Spleen.
HOW
 
WE ASK
The questions about the body concerning numbness, pain or
itching are self-explanatory.
ACHES IN THE WHOLE BODY
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
By ‘aches in the whole body’, I refer to aching or pain in most of
the joints and muscles; it is not a common 
symptom. The most
important distinction is that according to onset. Aching or pain in
the whole body with sudden onset is due to invasion of external
Wind and it is therefore accompanied by aversion to cold, shivers,
fever and a Floating pulse.
In chronic conditions, the most common cause of aches in the
whole body is deficiency of Qi and Blood. In this case, it is
accompanied by pronounced lassitude and it is ameliorated by
rest.
Aches in the muscles of the body and especially the limbs are
usually due to retention of Dampness in the muscles and are
frequently seen in ME (postviral fatigue syndrome); in this case,
the muscle ache is accompanied by a pronounced feeling of
heaviness of the limbs and body. Aches in all the muscles with a
hot sensation of the body on palpation are due to Stomach-Heat.
Pain in the arms and shoulders experienced only when walking
is due to Liver-Qi stagnation.
In women after childbirth, pain in the whole body is due to
787
Blood deficiency if it is dull or to Blood stasis if it is severe and
stabbing.
Box 37.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying aches in the whole
body.
 
BOX 37.1
 
   
 
ACHES IN THE WHOLE
BODY
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind: aching with aversion to
cold, shivers, fever, Floating pulse
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi and Blood: aching with lassitude,
ameliorated by rest
• 
 
Retention of Dampness in the muscles: aching with
feeling of heaviness of the limbs and body
• 
 
Stomach-Heat: aching with hot sensation of the body
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: pain in the arms and shoulders
when walking
• 
 
Blood deficiency: dull pain after childbirth
• 
 
Blood stasis: severe, stabbing pain after childbirth
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Pain in the joints is due to invasion of Wind, Dampness or Cold
in the channels of the joints. Joint ache from Wind moves from
joint to joint; joint pain from Dampness is fixed and is
characterized by swelling and numbness; joint pain from Cold is
fixed, usually in one joint only and the pain is intense.
In chronic cases, any of the above pathogenic factors can
transform into Heat, Dampness is formed and Damp-Heat
accumulates in the joints causing chronic pain. Severe stabbing
pain in the joints may be due to Blood stasis.
Box 37.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying joint pain.
 
BOX 37.2
 
   
 
JOINT PAIN
• 
 
Invasion of Wind: pain wandering from joint to joint
• 
 
Invasion of Dampness: pain with swelling and feeling
of heaviness/numbness
788
• 
 
Invasion of Cold: severe pain in single joint
• 
 
Damp-Heat: chronic pain, swelling, redness
• 
 
Blood stasis: severe, stabbing pain, rigidity
LOWER BACKACHE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 67
Acute pain in the lower back is due either to sprain or to
invasion of Cold. If it is due to sprain, the pain is intense, with
pronounced stiffness, and is improved by rest and aggravated by
movement; this pain is due to local stagnation of Qi and Blood. If
the pain is due to invasion of Cold, it is worse with rest, usually
worse in the mornings, and is alleviated by gentle movement.
Chronic lower backache is due to a Kidney deficiency, in which
case the backache is alleviated by rest and aggravated by overwork
and excessive sexual activity. In many cases of chronic lower
backache, there is a combination of the above three factors; for
example an underlying Kidney deficiency (causing a chronic dull
ache) predisposes the patient to invasion of Cold or to sprain and
therefore to periodic acute attacks.
Pain of the lower back extending to the upper back is usually
due to a combination of Kidney deficiency and Liver-Qi stagnation.
Box 37.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying lower backache.
 
BOX 37.3
 
   
 
LOWER BACKACHE
• 
 
Sprain: acute lower backache ameliorated by rest,
aggravated by movement
• 
 
Invasion of Cold: acute lower backache aggravated by
rest, ameliorated by movement
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: chronic lower backache
ameliorated by rest, aggravated by overwork or sexual
activity
• 
 
Kidney deficiency and Liver-Qi stagnation: chronic
lower backache extending to the upper back
789
NUMBNESS/TINGLING
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
Numbness or tingling may be due to three main causes: Blood
deficiency, Phlegm or internal Wind. With Blood deficiency, there is
numbness or tingling of both arms or legs or only hands or feet;
this is more common in women. Phlegm may cause numbness or
tingling in one or both limbs usually accompanied by a feeling of
heaviness. Internal Wind usually causes unilateral numbness in a
limb; if it affects the first three fingers in an old person this may
indicate the possibility of impending Wind-stroke.
Box 37.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying numbness and
tingling of the body.
 
BOX 37.4
 
   
 
NUMBNESS/TINGLING
• 
 
Blood deficiency: both limbs, more in women
• 
 
Phlegm: with feeling of heaviness
• 
 
Internal Wind: usually unilateral
ITCHING
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
The three main causes of itching are generally Wind, Dampness
or Heat; these three pathogenic factors cause intense itching.
Blood deficiency may also cause itching, which would be less
intense than the three above-mentioned pathogenic factors.
Itching caused by Wind is very intense and it occurs either in
different parts of the body, moving from one place to another, or in
the whole body. The itching due to Wind may be accompanied by a
rash but it may also occur without any external skin signs. Itching
caused by Wind may also be accompanied by dry skin because
Wind itself has a drying effect. In itching caused by Wind the
patient has an irresistible desire to scratch; the skin may break and
bleed but it heals soon after scratching.
Itching caused by Dampness is more localized, and usually
occurs only in specific places such as the axilla, the genital region
or the hands or feet. It is accompanied by the appearance of
790
vesicles and the skin breaks after scratching, oozing a fluid that
may be white or yellow according to whether the Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat. Itching caused by Damp-Heat is
more intense and is characterized by the appearance of yellow
vesicles or pustules. In severe, chronic cases the pustules may
fester and ooze pus and blood.
Itching caused by Blood-Heat is usually accompanied by a red
rash and it may occur either locally or in the whole body.
Itching caused by Blood deficiency is less intense, the skin is dry
and scaly and the itching is worse at night.
Itching caused by Toxic Heat is very intense and is accompanied
by the appearance of furuncles or festering ulcers which ooze pus
and blood. Toxic Heat in the skin is often a complication of chronic
eczema when the skin becomes infected.
Under certain circumstances itching can be a normal
manifestation that occurs during healing of wounds or ulcers.
Box 37.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying itching.
 
BOX 37.5
 
   
 
ITCHING
• 
 
Wind: intense generalized itching, possibly moving,
with rash or dry skin
• 
 
Dampness: localized itching, damp skin, vesicles
• 
 
Blood-Heat: itching with a red rash
• 
 
Blood deficiency: mild generalized itching with dry
skin, worse at night
• 
 
Toxic Heat: intense itching with pustules, ulcers or
eczema
• 
 
Itching during healing of wounds or ulcers: normal
LOSS OF WEIGHT
The two most common causes of loss of weight are Blood or Yin
deficiency; other causes include Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency, Stomach-Heat and Liver-Fire. Although Stomach- and
Spleen-Qi deficiency normally tend to make a person overweight
because they lead to Dampness and Phlegm, in severe cases (such
791
as in anorexia) they may lead to loss of weight because the body is
not nourished by the Food Essences.
OBESITY
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 68
When not due purely to overeating, obesity is generally caused
by retention of Damp-Phlegm occurring against a background of
Spleen-Qi or Kidney-Yang deficiency, or both.
792
CHAPTER 38
 
CHEST AND
ABDOMEN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
CHEST
Cough
Chest pain
Pain in the ribs
Feeling of oppression of the chest
Feeling of heat in the chest
Palpitations
ABDOMEN
Sensations
Areas of abdominal pain
Interrogations in relation to diagnoses of the chest and abdomen
are discussed separately below.
793
CHEST
The chest, or thorax, refers to the part of the body enclosed by the
ribs and breast bone. From the Chinese point of view, there is a
difference between the front part of the chest, which is under the
influence of the Heart and Lungs, and the sides of the chest, which
are under the influence of the Liver and Gall-Bladder. The front of
the chest is also the area where the Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
) is
concentrated (see 
Fig 12.1
 
, 
p. 121
 
).
WHY
 
WE ASK
It is necessary to ask about chest symptoms because some of them
occur frequently in practice. In particular, symptoms often
manifest themselves in the chest; for example, a feeling of
oppression may be felt there, or palpitations, which often derive
from emotional stress.
Patients do not often volunteer information on chest symptoms
unless we ask. For example, in my experience, few patients will
actually describe experiencing a ‘feeling of oppression’ in the
chest.
In addition, both the tongue and the pulse frequently reflect a
pathology of the chest: a Purple area in the tongue’s chest area (see
Fig 23.10 on p. 206
 
), for example, or a pulse that is Weak and Deep
on both Front positions.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Chest symptoms often reflect very common pathologies such as
Liver-Qi stagnation, Phlegm in the chest 
and Heart-Blood
deficiency. Therefore, I specifically ask about chest symptoms
quite early in the interrogation as patients are describing their
symptoms.
HOW
 
WE ASK
It is important to be sensitive when asking questions regarding the
794
chest because people often fear that if we ask about the chest we
suspect a heart pathology. Besides this, some typical Chinese
expressions are not used by Western patients and we should
therefore phrase the question in a way that is understandable to
the patient. For example, few patients will actually use the
expression ‘feeling of oppression of the chest’; they will probably
describe a ‘feeling of tightness of the chest’ or say a feeling was
‘like having a weight on the chest’.
‘Palpitations’ is another example of the importance of asking
questions in a way that the patient can understand. Most people
think that palpitations are synonymous with tachycardia, that is,
the heart beating faster than normal. We should therefore explain
to the patient that ‘palpitations’ simply means an uncomfortable
sensation of being aware of one’s heartbeat.
Cough
Observation,
 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and
Signs,
 
Chapter 63
When a patient presents with a cough, we must first of all
establish whether it is an acute or a chronic cough. By ‘acute’ we
mean a cough that had a sudden onset and may continue for a few
days or weeks. By ‘chronic’, we mean either a cough that began
insidiously without a previous invasion of Wind and persisted for
months or years, or one that began with an exterior invasion of
Wind and persisted for months or years.
An acute cough may have any of three causes. First, it may be an
acute cough in the very beginning stages of an invasion of Wind,
when the pathogenic factor is still on the Exterior. Secondly, it may
be an acute cough with the pathogenic factor (such as Heat or
Phlegm-Heat) in the Interior following an external invasion.
Thirdly, it may be an acute cough caused by a residual pathogenic
factor (such as Dryness or Phlegm) following an external invasion.
In the first case the cough will be accompanied by signs of the
external invasion such as aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, a
runny nose and a Floating pulse. Heat or Phlegm-Heat in the
Lungs produces a barking cough with yellow mucus, feelings of
heat and thirst, and an Overflowing-Rapid pulse. In residual
795
Dryness with Phlegm in the Lungs, the cough is dry with difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum after repeated bouts of coughing,
and a tickling sensation in the throat.
A chronic cough is generally due either to chronic retention of
Phlegm in the Lungs (which may be combined with Dampness,
Heat or Dryness), or to deficiency of Qi or Yin, or both, of the
Lungs.
A very common type of chronic cough is one due to Damp-
Phlegm in the Lungs, which is characterized by the expectoration
of profuse, white sputum which is easy to expectorate, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a Swollen tongue with a sticky coating and
a very Slippery pulse. When Phlegm combines with Heat in the
Lungs the cough has a louder sound and is characterized by the
expectoration of yellow sputum, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, a feeling of heat and a Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky
yellow coating and a Slippery-Rapid pulse.
A common type of chronic cough in the elderly is that due to
Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs which is characterized by a chronic, dry
cough with a weak sound and the occasional, difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum, a dry throat and a Swollen tongue
with a dry coating.
A chronic cough due to a deficiency of Lung-Qi or Lung-Yin is
characterized by a slight, dry cough with a weak sound, dry throat
in the evening accompanied by the signs of Qi or Yin deficiency,
such as night sweating, and a tongue without coating.
Case history 38.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying chronic cough.
 
Case History 38.1
A 48-year-old woman had been suffering from a
persistent cough for 6 months: she felt she had some
phlegm in the throat but this was difficult to
expectorate so that the cough was often dry. When she
did expectorate some sputum, this was thick, sticky and
white. She also complained of breathlessness and a
feeling of tightness and oppression of the chest. A chest
specialist had diagnosed bronchiectasis.
She was thin and slightly built and she had
experienced loss of weight for the past 2 years. Her
complexion was very dull and sallow. She also suffered
796
from a general cold feeling, cold hands and feet,
constipation and a yellow vaginal dis-charge.
Her tongue-body colour was normal but the tongue
body was Swollen; the back of the tongue had a
rootless, yellow coating but no ‘spirit’. Her pulse was
Weak in general, especially in both the Rear positions,
but also slightly Slippery.
Diagnosis:
The cough with expectoration of thick, sticky white
sputum, together with the breathlessness and feeling of
tightness and oppression of the chest, indicate the
presence of Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs, which is
confirmed by the swelling of the tongue body and the
Slippery pulse. The general cold feeling, cold hands and
feet, constipation and Weak Rear pulse positions also
indicate Kidney-Yang deficiency, which obviously
contributed to the formation of Phlegm. The Kidney
deficiency is also evidenced by the absence of ‘spirit’ on
the root of the tongue. Besides Damp-Phlegm in the
Lungs, there is also Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner,
which causes the yellow vaginal discharge.
The loss of weight which occurred in the previous 2
years and the rootless tongue coating point to the
beginning of a situation of Kidney-Yin deficiency, which
may sometimes develop from Kidney-Yang deficiency.
The treatment should concentrate first on resolving
Damp-Phlegm and stimulating the descending of Lung-
Qi and secondly on tonifying the Kidneys.
Box 38.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying cough.
 
BOX 38.1
 
   
 
COUGH
Acute
• 
 
External invasion of Wind: acute cough, aversion to
cold, fever, sore throat, runny nose, Floating pulse
797
• 
 
Heat or Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs: acute, barking
cough with expectoration of yellow mucus, feeling of
heat, thirst, Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Residual dryness and Phlegm in the Lungs: acute, dry
cough with difficult expectoration of scanty sputum
after repeated bouts of dry coughing, tickling sensation
in throat.
Chronic
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs: chronic cough with easy
expectoration of profuse, white sputum, feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs: loud chronic cough with
expectoration of profuse yellow or greenish sputum,
feeling of heat, feeling of oppression of the chest, Red
and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs: chronic dry cough with
occasional, difficult expectoration of scanty sputum, dry
throat, Swollen tongue with a dry coating
• 
 
Lung-Qi deficiency: chronic, slight cough with weak
sound, weak voice, Empty pulse
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency: chronic, dry cough, dry throat in
the evening, night sweating, tongue without coating
Chest Pain
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Here ‘chest’ indicates the front of the chest. A pain in this area is
usually due to either the Heart or Lung channel and it always
denotes a Full condition (even though this may itself derive from
an underlying Empty condition).
Chest pain can be differentiated according to its character. A
fixed, pricking, stabbing or needle-like pain indicates Blood stasis.
Chest pain accompanied by a feeling of distension of the chest
798
itself and the hypochondrium indicates Qi stagnation and is
usually accompanied by sighing and irritability. An intermittent,
chronic chest pain that comes and goes also indicates Blood stasis
but suggests an underlying Empty condition of Qi or Yang
deficiency.
A stabbing or pricking chest pain indicates Blood stasis affecting
the Heart channel (especially if it radiates down the left arm) and
this often occurs against a background of Heart-Yang deficiency; it
falls into the category of Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome.
Chest pain accompanied by cough with expectoration of profuse
yellow sputum is due to Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs and this may
be seen in acute lung conditions, such as bronchitis, pneumonia or
pleuritis.
A chest pain in a large area of the chest together with a cough,
breathlessness and a red face indicates Lung-Heat. Chest pain
extending to the hypochondrial region may be due to Damp-Heat
in the Liver and Gall-Bladder channel, in which case it may be
accompanied by feeling of heaviness and a sticky taste.
Pain in the heart region on the left side of the chest indicates
either Heart-Blood stasis or Phlegm obstructing the Heart channel.
Chest pain extending to the upper back is usually due to Phlegm
or Blood stasis.
Box 38.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying chest pain.
 
BOX 38.2
 
   
 
CHEST PAIN
• 
 
Heart-Blood stasis: fixed, stabbing or pricking chest
pain
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: distending chest and
hypochondrial pain
• 
 
Blood stasis with underlying Empty condition:
intermittent chronic chest pain
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs: chest pain with cough and
profuse, yellow sputum
• 
 
Lung-Heat: chest pain with cough and breathlessness,
red face
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder: chest and
hypochondrial pain with feeling of heaviness and sticky
taste
• 
 
Phlegm obstructing the Heart: pain in the left side of
799
the chest
• 
 
Phlegm or Blood stasis: chest pain extending to the
upper back
Pain In The Ribs
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
‘Pain in the ribs’ refers to pain on the lateral aspect of the rib
cage above the hypochondrial area.
The most common patterns causing pain in the ribs are Liver-Qi
stagnation, Blood stasis and Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder. The
characteristic symptoms of these patterns are listed in 
Box 38.3
 
.
 
BOX 38.3
 
   
 
PAIN IN THE RIBS
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: pain in the ribs with a
pronounced feeling of distension
• 
 
Blood stasis: severe, stabbing pain
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder: pain in the
ribs with a feeling of oppression and heaviness
Feeling Of Oppression Of The Chest
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
A feeling of oppression of the chest is the translation of the
Chinese term 
Xiong Men
 
. Western patients, at least in Anglo-
Saxon countries, would seldom use this term and report this
symptom as a feeling of tightness, discomfort in the chest, or the
sensation of having a weight on the chest.
A feeling of oppression of the chest accompanied by slight
breathlessness, sighing, a cough and expectoration of phlegm
indicates retention of Phlegm in the Lungs, which is the most
common cause of this symptom. A feeling of oppression of the
chest without a cough and without expectoration of phlegm, and
accompanied by slight breathlessness, sighing and a feeling of a
lump in the throat, indicates stagnation of Lung-Qi with Lung-Qi
800
failing to descend; this is usually caused by emotional problems
such as sadness or worry. Although a feeling of a lump in the
throat is usually related to Liver-Qi stagnation, stagnation of Lung-
Qi caused by emotional problems is a very frequent cause of this
symptom together with a feeling of oppression of the chest.
Another very common cause of a feeling of oppression of the
chest is rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel, which is more
common in women. However, before diagnosing rebellious Qi of
the Penetrating Vessel, we should check whether the feeling of
oppression of the chest is accompanied by other relevant
symptoms such as abdominal distension or fullness, pain or
fullness around the umbilicus, or epigastric tightness.
In a few cases, a severe stagnation of Liver-Qi from emotional
problems may also cause a feeling of oppression of the chest.
Box 38.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a feeling of
oppression of the chest.
 
BOX 38.4
 
   
 
FEELING OF OPPRESSION
OF THE CHEST
• 
 
Phlegm in the Lungs: slight breathlessness, sighing,
cough with expectoration of phlegm
• 
 
Stagnation of Lung-Qi: sighing, feeling of lump in the
throat, slight breathlessness without cough or
expectoration
• 
 
Rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel: abdominal
distension/fullness, epigastric tightness, pain/fullness
around umbilicus
• 
 
Severe Liver-Qi stagnation: depression, irritability
Feeling Of Heat In The Chest
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Excluding external invasions of Wind-Heat, a feeling of heat in
the chest is due to Full- or Empty-Heat of the Lung or Heart
channels. If there is a feeling of heat in the chest, accompanied by
thirst, insomnia, palpitations, agitation and a Red tip of the
tongue, this indicates Heart-Fire; if there is a feeling of heat in the
801
evening, dry mouth at night, insomnia, night sweating and five-
palm heat, it is due to Heart Empty-Heat.
A feeling of heat in the chest accompanied by a cough, hot
hands, a red face and expectoration of yellow mucus is due to
Lung-Heat; if it is accompanied by night sweating, a feeling of heat
in the afternoon, five-palm heat, a dry throat at night and a dry
cough it indicates Lung Empty-Heat.
Box 38.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a feeling of heat in
the chest.
 
BOX 38.5
 
   
 
FEELING OF HEAT IN THE
CHEST
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind-Heat: aversion to cold,
fever, sore throat
• 
 
Heart-Fire: thirst, insomnia, palpitations, agitation,
Red tip of the tongue
• 
 
Heart Empty-Heat: insomnia, night sweating, feeling
of heat in the evening, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat
• 
 
Lung-Heat: cough, hot hands, red face
• 
 
Lung Empty-Heat: dry cough, feeling of heat in the
afternoon, night sweating, dry throat at night, five-palm
heat
Palpitations
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
When we ask patients about palpitations it is important to
explain to them the meaning of this symptom, as most patients
mistakenly identify ‘palpitations’ with tachycardia, that is, the
pulse beating faster than normal. In reality, palpitations are not
related to the rate or speed of the pulse but simply indicate a
subjective and uncomfortable sensation of being aware of one’s
heartbeat.
Palpitations are a symptom that is always related to the Heart
and may appear in any of the Heart patterns.
Palpitations with an acute onset may be due to external stimuli
802
such as a fright or an overwhelming emotional upset, in which
case they are called ‘fright palpitations’ (
Jing Ji
 
).
Palpitations that extend upwards towards the chest and throat
and downwards towards the umbilicus and abdomen are called
Zheng Chong
 
, which I translate as ‘panic palpitations’ (literally it
means ‘panic and anxiety’). This type of palpitations is due to
rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel affecting the Heart and is
considered more severe than ordinary palpitations.
Case history 38.2
 
illustrates a pattern underlying palpitations.
 
Case History 38.2
A 44-year-old woman had been suffering from
palpitations for 8 years. ‘Palpitations’ was just a
subjective symptom of a feeling of her heart thumping
in her chest and was not associated with tachycardia.
The palpitations were always worse before her period.
She also complained of nausea and an epigastric pain,
which was experienced just under the sternum, a sticky
taste and a feeling of lump in the throat. She
experienced a dry mouth occasionally, and occasionally
suffered from tinnitus.
Her periods were basically normal, coming every 4
weeks, lasting 6 days and they were not painful. The
only problem associated with the periods was
premenstrual tension.
Her complexion was dull and sallow without lustre
and her eyes were very dull and lacked lustre to an
extreme degree.
Her tongue was of a normal colour, except for a Red
tip. It had a Heart crack and, although it could not be
defined as being peeled, the coating was not sufficient.
Her pulse was Fine on the right and Floating-Empty on
the left.
Diagnosis:
The aggravation of the palpitations before the period,
together with the nausea, epigastric pain under the
sternum and the feeling of lump in the throat, indicate
a condition of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel, as
803
this vessel flows through the stomach, connects with
the heart, traverses the chest and goes over the throat
(on its way to the face).
However, the pulse, being Fine on the right, and the
dull-sallow complexion clearly show a condition of
Blood deficiency, while the Floating-Empty nature of the
pulse on the left side and the insufficient coating on the
tongue show the beginning of Yin deficiency (of the
Liver, Kidneys and Heart). In this case, therefore, the
condition of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel is
secondary to the condition of Blood and Yin deficiency;
in other words, the Qi of the Penetrating Vessel rebels
upward 
because
 
there is a deficiency of Blood and Yin. In
fact, the Penetrating Vessel is the Sea of Blood and it is
therefore easily affected by Blood deficiency. The
treatment principle in this case, therefore, should be to
nourish Blood and Yin (of the Heart and Liver)
primarily and to subdue rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel secondarily.
The Heart crack and the very dull appearance of the
eyes indicate a disturbed Mind and a strong propensity
to emotional problems.
ABDOMEN
Abdomen here refers to the area of the trunk between the
diaphragm and the symphysis pubis (see 
Fig 16.7
 
, 
p. 145
 
).
WHY
 
WE ASK
Abdominal symptoms are so frequent that it is absolutely crucial
to ask about them in every case, even if the patient presents with a
problem in an entirely different area, (e.g. headaches). The
abdomen readily reflects extremely common patterns such as Qi
stagnation, Blood stasis and Dampness.
804
WHEN
 
WE ASK
If the patient does not come specifically to consult about
abdominal symptoms, I generally ask about these immediately
after asking about digestive problems (related to the Stomach).
HOW
 
WE ASK
It is important to be clear about the area involved because patients
are often vague about the location of their abdominal symptoms.
For example, someone might refer to the whole abdomen as the
‘stomach’. We should therefore always make sure we ask the
patient to point to the area involved.
In the case of pain, we should first let patients describe the
abdominal pain in their own words; only then can we ask
systematically about the reaction of pain to pressure, application
of heat and food or drinks in order to establish the Full or Empty
and the Hot or Cold character of the pain. When asking about the
reaction of their abdominal pain to ‘pressure’, instead of simply
asking ‘Is it better with pressure or not?’, which the patient would
not really understand, we should ask, ‘When you have the pain, do
you like to press the area of pain with your hands, or do you
dislike being touched?’ We should then ask about the reaction of
the abdominal pain to exposure to heat or cold and to ingestion of
hot or cold drinks.
Besides this, there is also a terminology problem since few
patients will actually use the term ‘distension’ (often described as
‘bloating’ in English), and even fewer the term ‘stuffiness’. The
exact meaning of these symptoms is described below.
The discussion of abdominal symptoms will be centred first on
the four most common sensations experienced in the abdomen,
which are:
 
• 
 
distension
• 
 
pain
• 
 
fullness
• 
 
stuffiness.
805
After this, the various abdominal symptoms will be discussed
according to areas (see 
Fig 16.7 on p. 145
 
), which are:
 
• 
 
the area under the xyphoid process (
Xin Xia
 
)
• 
 
the epigastrium
• 
 
the hypochondrium
• 
 
the umbilical area
• 
 
the central-lower abdominal area
• 
 
the right-lateral and left-lateral lower abdominal area.
Sensations
Distension
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A feeling of abdominal distension or ‘bloating’ is an extremely
common symptom. The following patterns 
most commonly cause
distension of the abdomen (in order of frequency):
 
• 
 
Qi stagnation – severe distension
• 
 
Spleen-Qi deficiency – mild distension
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm.
Besides the subjective feeling of bloating, distension is also
characterized by an objective, distended, drum-like feeling on
palpation.
 
Remember
 
: distension is a subjective feeling of
bloating but it is also an objective sign of the abdomen,
i.e. the abdomen feels distended like a drum on
palpation.
Pain
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Abdominal pain can be due to a very wide variety of conditions,
806
some Full and some Empty. By definition, the abdominal pain from
a Full condition is severe, whereas that from an Empty condition is
mild. Among the Full conditions that may cause abdominal pain
are:
 
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Dampness
• 
 
Retention of food
• 
 
Cold.
Among the Empty conditions are:
 
• 
 
Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Empty-Cold
• 
 
Kidney deficiency.
(For a detailed discussion of the patterns causing abdominal
pain in its various areas, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 71
 
.)
Abdominal pain is one of the most common presenting
symptoms in practice. When diagnosing such pain, it is important
to refer to the basic principles, which allow us to differentiate
Fullness from Emptiness and Heat from Cold. Abdominal pain
that is alleviated by pressure indicates Deficiency, whereas if it is
aggravated by pressure or if the patient dislikes being touched in
the area this indicates Fullness. Abdominal pain that is alleviated
by the application of heat (such as a hot-water bottle) or by the
ingestion of warm drinks indicates a Cold condition, and the same
if it is aggravated by exposure to cold or ingestion of cold drinks.
Abdominal pain that is aggravated by exposure to heat or by the
ingestion of warm drinks indicates a Heat condition, and the same
if it is alleviated by exposure to cold (which is very rare even in
Heat conditions) or by the ingestion of cold drinks.
Fullness
807
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
A feeling of fullness in the abdomen is usually caused by
Dampness or retention of food. Subjectively the patient feels full
as if having had a large meal and there is a very slight feeling of
nausea; objectively the abdomen feels hard on palpation.
 
A subjective feeling of fullness is mirrored by an
objective hardness of the abdomen on palpation.
Stuffiness
‘Stuffiness’ is a translation of the Chinese term 
Pi
 
(although this
term has a broader meaning than simply ‘feeling of stuffiness’). A
feeling of stuffiness in the abdomen is characterized by a
subjective mild feeling of fullness, together with an objective soft
feeling of the abdomen on palpation. This symptom is usually due
to either Dampness or Heat occurring against a background of
Deficiency.
 
A feeling of stuffiness is characterized by the
contradiction between a subjective feeling of fullness
and an objective, soft feeling to the abdomen on
palpation.
Areas Of Abdominal Pain
Before establishing the Full or Empty and Hot or Cold nature of
the condition according to the abdominal symptoms, it is
important to ask the patient to identify clearly the location of the
problem, which is most commonly pain. Patients are often vague
about the location of the pain and we should ask them to pay
attention and be exact. This difficulty is particularly evident in
children who are often unable to identify the exact location of the
abdominal pain.
The regions of the abdomen in Chinese medicine are as follows
(see 
Fig 16.7 on p. 145
 
):
808
 
• 
 
Area under the xyphoid process: this is the small area
immediately below the xyphoid process extending
approximately 50 mm (2 inches) and bordered by the
ribs. It is influenced by the Heart and Stomach channels
and the Penetrating Vessel.
• 
 
Epigastric: this is the area between the xyphoid
process and the umbilicus but excluding the
hypochondrial area. It is related to the Stomach and
Spleen channels.
• 
 
Hypochondrial: these are the two areas below the rib
cage. This area is influenced by the Liver and Gall-
Bladder channels.
• 
 
Umbilical: this is the area around the umbilicus. It is
influenced by the Spleen, Liver, Kidney and Small
Intestine channels.
• 
 
Central-lower abdominal (
Xiao Fu
 
): this is the area
between the umbilicus and the symphysis pubis. This
area is influenced by the Liver, Kidney, Bladder and
Large Intestine channels and by the Directing Vessel; in
women, it is also influenced by the Uterus.
• 
 
Right-lateral-lower abdominal and left-lateral-lower
abdominal (
Shao Fu
 
): these are the lateral areas of the
lower abdomen. This area is influenced by the Liver and
Large Intestine channels, and by the Penetrating Vessel.
The diagnosis of abdominal problems, and especially abdominal
pain, is much more complex than with those of the epigastric
region because of the large number of channels involved. In
women, it is even more complex because the lower abdomen can
reflect problems of all the above channels as well as those of the
Uterus and gynaecological system. In practice it is therefore often
difficult in women to differentiate whether an abdominal pain is of
intestinal or gynaecological origin. This difficulty exists also in
Western medicine. In Chinese medicine, however, the distinction
is less important than it is in Western medicine as there is often an
overlap between a pathology of the Intestines and one of the
809
gynaecological system. For example, in women stasis of Blood in
the lower abdomen may cause painful periods and an abdominal
pain of intestinal origin at the same time.
Here I will discuss the most common patterns and conditions
differentiated according to their location (i.e. the area under the
xyphoid process, epigastrium, hypochondrium, umbilical area,
central-lower abdomen, right-lateral lower abdomen and left-
lateral lower abdomen). (For the differentiation of various
abdominal symptoms, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 71
 
.)
Area under the xyphoid process
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
The area under the xyphoid process extends approximately 50
mm (2 inches) from the xyphoid process and is bordered by the
ribs. It is influenced by the Stomach, Heart and Penetrating Vessel
channels and its symptomatology often reflects emotional
problems. In fact, this is an area that is very easily and frequently
affected by emotional problems due to worry, fear, sadness or
grief. The symptoms related to this area may include a feeling of
tightness, distension, oppression, stuffiness and palpitations
depending on the channel and pathology involved.
The Penetrating Vessel has a strong influence on this area
causing a feeling of tightness; however, a pathology of the
Penetrating Vessel can be diagnosed only if the feeling of tightness
in this area is associated with other abdominal or chest sensations,
such as lower abdominal fullness or pain, epigastric distension or
pain and chest oppression or tightness. A typical symptom of the
Penetrating Vessel in the area below the xyphoid is characterized
by a feeling of ‘urgency’, anxiety and palpitations in that area.
Occasionally, Western patients will describe this Penetrating Vessel
symptomatology in different and unusual ways; for example, in
England, a patient may describe a feeling of ‘butterflies’ in this
area, of ‘heart cascading’, ‘as if the stomach was having an
argument with itself’ or ‘adrenaline rushing up and down the
chest’. All these are symptoms related to rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel along its course in the abdomen and chest and
affecting the Heart and the region under the xyphoid process.
In the absence of other Penetrating Vessel symptoms along its
810
course, symptoms in the area under the xyphoid are usually
related to the Stomach or Heart. The symptoms in this area should
be closely integrated with palpation: a hardness on palpation
indicates a Full condition whereas a softness indicates an Empty
condition.
A feeling of oppression in the area under the xyphoid process
usually indicates Phlegm or severe stagnation of Qi in the Heart
and Stomach channel. A feeling of fullness in this area indicates
retention of 
food in the Stomach affecting the Heart; a feeling of
stuffiness in this area (i.e. the patient feels full but the area is soft
on palpation) indicates Stomach and Spleen deficiency with Heart-
Heat. A feeling of distension in this area indicates stagnation of Qi
in the Stomach.
On the pulse, this area can be felt on the distal end of the right
Middle position, by placing the finger on the Stomach position and
rolling it distally very slightly.
Box 38.6
 
summarizes patterns underlying pain in the area under
the xyphoid process.
 
BOX 38.6
 
   
 
AREA UNDER THE XYPHOID
PROCESS
• 
 
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel: tightness and
distension with anxiety and palpitations
• 
 
Phlegm or severe Qi stagnation: feeling of oppression
• 
 
Retention of food: feeling of fullness
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency with Heart-Heat:
feeling of stuffiness
• 
 
Stomach-Qi stagnation: feeling of distension
Epigastrium
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
This refers to the area between the xyphoid process and the
umbilicus, but excluding the hypochondrial area. The epigastrium
is closely related to the Stomach and Spleen channels and it
reflects primarily Stomach patterns, such as Cold in the Stomach,
Stomach-Heat, Stomach-Fire, Damp-Heat in the Stomach, Stomach
811
deficient and cold, Stomach-Yin deficiency, etc.
In a patient presenting with an epigastric problem (which is
usually pain or distension) it is important to integrate questions
about the character of the epigastric pain with those about thirst,
taste, nausea, belching and sour regurgitation.
The upper part of the epigastrium (i.e. the area just below the
xyphoid process) is influenced also by the Heart channel and in
Chinese medicine there is often an overlap and an interaction
between the Stomach and the Heart channels in certain patterns.
For example, rebellious Stomach-Qi causing nausea and vomiting
is often associated with rebellious Heart-Qi, that is, Heart-Qi not
descending so that the patient may have epigastric pain, nausea,
vomiting, belching, sour regurgitation but also palpitations and a
discomfort that extends from the epigastrium to the sternum area.
However, epigastric pain is not always related to the Stomach
channel and in some cases the Chinese diagnosis of epigastric pain
should be integrated with a Western diagnosis. For example, when
the Large Intestine is affected by stagnation of Qi and there is
severe flatulence in the transverse colon, this may cause an
epigastric pain; in this case it would be wrong to attribute the
problem to the Stomach channel simply because it occurs in the
epigastric area. Of course, in such a case there would be other
symptoms such as lower abdominal pain, constipation and small
stools, which would point to the Large Intestine.
There are many types of epigastric pain, as follows:
 
• 
 
A spastic epigastric pain that is ameliorated by the
application of heat and the ingestion of warm drinks
indicates Full-Cold in the Stomach.
• 
 
Epigastric pain with a pronounced feeling of fullness
indicates retention of food, which is more common in
children.
• 
 
A distending epigastric pain radiating to the right or
left hypochondrium indicates rebellious Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach; this is a very common type of
epigastric pain.
• 
 
Burning epigastric pain denotes Stomach-Heat.
• 
 
Burning epigastric pain with a feeling of heaviness,
nausea and a feeling of oppression of the chest indicates
812
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach.
• 
 
Burning epigastric pain with a feeling of heaviness, a
sticky taste and a sticky yellow tongue coating denotes
Damp-Heat in the Stomach.
• 
 
A severe, stabbing epigastric pain indicates Blood
stasis in the Stomach.
• 
 
A chronic, intermittent, dull ache that is ameliorated
by the application of heat and the ingestion of warm
drinks, and is aggravated by overwork, indicates
Stomach deficient and cold.
• 
 
A chronic, intermittent, dull, slightly burning
epigastric pain with a dry mouth indicates Stomach-Yin
deficiency.
Feelings of pain, distension, tightness or oppression of the
epigastrium may also be caused by rebellious Qi in the Penetrating
Vessel. However, such epigastric sensations point to a Penetrating
Vessel pathology only when they are associated with other
abdominal symptoms such as pain or distension in the lower
abdomen or umbilical pain.
Interrogation about epigastric symptoms should be closely
integrated with investigation of the tongue and pulse.
Epigastrium manifestation on the tongue
On the tongue, the epigastric area is reflected either in the centre
or on the sides around the centre (see 
Fig 23.3 on p. 205
 
). An
examination of the coating in this area is essential to distinguish
Full from Empty conditions as a Full condition will be reflected by
a thick coating in this area and an Empty condition by a rootless
coating or the absence of coating. The coating in this area also
closely reflects the Hot or Cold nature of Stomach problems: a
white coating indicates Cold while a yellow (including brown)
coating indicates Heat. The thickness of the coating reflects the
intensity of the pathogenic factor: the thicker the coating, the more
intense is the pathogenic factor.
To summarize, when examining the coating in the Stomach area
813
of the tongue, we should establish systematically first whether
there is a coating or not, secondly the colour of the coating and
thirdly the thickness of the coating. Some Stomach pathologies are
reflected in the central section of the tongue on the sides; for
example, Stomach-Heat often manifests with a redness in these
areas. Cracks in the central area are a very clear reflection of
Stomach-Yin deficiency; these may be small horizontal or vertical
cracks or a wide, midline crack in the central area. While small
cracks in this area develop gradually from dietary irregularities, a
wide central midline Stomach crack may be hereditary and
indicate a tendency to develop Stomach-Yin deficiency.
Epigastrium manifestation on the pulse
With regard to the pulse, the right Middle position of course
reflects closely Stomach disharmonies. The most common pulse
qualities in this position are Slippery, Soggy, Floating-Empty and
Wiry. A Slippery pulse in the Stomach/Spleen position indicates
retention of Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen; a Soggy quality
indicates Dampness occurring against a background of Stomach
and Spleen deficiency; a Floating-Empty pulse in this position
indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency; a Wiry pulse in this position
denotes Stomach-Qi stagnation, which may occur by itself or as a
consequence of Liver-Qi stagnation in which case the pulse would
be Wiry in both Middle positions. An interesting aspect of the
Stomach pulse is its upper part, which is felt by rolling the finger
distally (towards the fingers) very slightly. This corresponds to the
oesophagus and if the pulse is Tight in this area it indicates
rebellious Stomach-Qi or stagnation of food in the upper part of
the Stomach, which is often due to eating too fast or eating when
under pressure at work.
Case history 38.3
 
illustrates a case of deficiency and rebellious
Liver-Qi causing epigastric pain.
 
Case History 38.3
A 42-year-old woman complained of indigestion,
belching, acidity, sour regurgitation and epigastric
distension. She had been suffering from this problem
for several years. Her appetite was normal, there was no
nausea and her stools were normal. Her complexion
814
was dull and pale.
Her tongue was Pale on the sides, slightly Swollen
and very slightly lacking a coating in the centre. Her
pulse was Weak and Choppy.
Diagnosis:
The digestive symptoms clearly suggest the condition
of rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach and
preventing Stomach-Qi from descending, which causes
the belching and sour regurgitation. However, the
tongue and pulse show predominantly Deficiency and
in particular, deficiency of Spleen-Qi (Weak pulse), a
slight Stomach-Yin deficiency (lack of coating in the
centre) and a Liver-Blood deficiency (Pale sides and
Choppy pulse). In conditions of rebellious Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach and Spleen, one can distinguish
two situations: one when the primary problem is a
disharmony of the Liver channel caused by emotional
problems and the other when the primary problem is a
weakness of the Stomach and Spleen, which ‘allow’
themselves to be invaded by the Liver. In this case, the
latter situation clearly applies. This distinction is
important to determine the appropriate treatment
principle because, in the first situation, the primary aim
is to subdue rebellious Liver-Qi and the secondary one
to tonify the Stomach and Spleen; in the second
situation, the primary aim is to tonify the Stomach and
Spleen and the secondary one to subdue rebellious
Liver-Qi.
Box 38.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying epigastric pain.
 
BOX 38.7
 
   
 
EPIGASTRIC PAIN
• 
 
Cold in the Stomach: spastic pain ameliorated by heat
• 
 
Retention of food: pain with feeling of fullness
• 
 
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach: Distending
pain radiating to the right or left hypochondrium
815
• 
 
Stomach-Heat: burning, redness in centre of tongue
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach: burning pain with
feeling of heaviness and feeling of oppression of chest
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach: pain with feeling of
heaviness and sticky taste, sticky yellow tongue coating
• 
 
Blood stasis in the Stomach: severe, stabbing pain
• 
 
Stomach deficient and cold: chronic, intermittent, dull
ache ameliorated by heat and warm drinks, aggravated
by cold
• 
 
Stomach-Yin deficiency: chronic, intermittent burning
pain, dry mouth
• 
 
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel: distension,
tightness and pain radiating to
abdomen/umbilicus/chest, anxiety
Hypochondrium
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Most patients are not familiar with the word ‘hypochondrium’.
Therefore when I ask patients about symptoms in this area, I
simply point to it. The hypochondrial area includes the ribs and
the area immediately below them on both sides; this area is
influenced by the Liver and Gall-Bladder channels and it is
important to note that the left hypochondrial area may also reflect
Liver disharmonies. Again, when patients report abdominal
problems in this area, it is important to identify the location
exactly. If any pain is located only in the hypochondrial region, it is
definitely related to the Liver or Gall-Bladder channels, or both; if
the pain starts in the hypochondrial region and radiates towards
the centre of the epigastrium, it indicates rebellious Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach; if the pain starts in the centre of the
epigastrium and radiates towards either the right or left
hypochondrium, it indicates a primary deficiency of the Stomach
with a secondary stagnation of Liver-Qi.
Case history 38.4
 
illustrates a pattern underlying hypochondrial
pain.
 
816
Case History 38.4
A 49-year-old woman had been suffering from recurrent
bouts of pain and discomfort in the right
hypochondrium for the past 7 years. The pain was
sometimes sharp in nature and radiated to her
shoulder.
The patient also suffered from a feeling of muzziness
in her head, lacked concentration and sometimes had
difficulty finding her words. She had occasional dizzy
spells in the mornings and also suffered from blurred
vision and floaters. She often felt tired and her joints
would ache, especially her left hip where she had had
pain for a long time.
The patient suffered from insomnia and often woke
up between 3 am and 4 am. She used to suffer from
colitis, with abdominal pain, mucus and blood in the
stools and diarrhoea. This had been helped by
acupuncture although she still had loose stools.
She suffered from premenstrual breast distension
and irritability. Her periods were becoming scantier and
her left breast hurt after her period. She had several
breast lumps.
The tongue body was slightly Pale-Purple, with Red
points and slightly Red sides. It was Swollen with
teethmarks and had a sticky coating. Her pulse was
Deep-Weak-Choppy and the left Front position was
relatively Overflowing.
Diagnosis:
The hypochondrial pain is caused by Liver-Qi
stagnation. Other symptoms of Liver-Qi stagnation are
the premenstrual breast distension and irritability.
Evidence of the long-standing and severe nature of the
stagnation is shown by the tongue having a slightly
Purple colour.
The feeling of muzziness in the head, lack of
concentration, difficulty in finding words, breast lumps
and dizzy spells in the morning point towards the
817
presence of Phlegm. This is confirmed by the Swollen
tongue body and the sticky tongue coating.
The underlying Deficiency which has led to the
development of Phlegm is predominantly one of
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang. This is causing the loose
stools and tiredness and is reflected in the pulse, which
is Deep and Weak, and on the tongue, which is Swollen
with teethmarks.
There is also a deficiency of Liver-Blood, manifesting
with blurred vision, floaters, the periods becoming
scantier, the Choppy quality of the pulse and the Pale
colour of the tongue. The pain in the left breast
occurring 
after
 
the period indicates that, although it is
due to Liver-Qi stagnation, there is an underlying Blood
deficiency. Ache in the joints is normally due to Painful
Obstruction Syndrome with Wind, Dampness or Cold;
however, in women, ache in the joints without swelling
is often caused simply by deficient Blood failing to
nourish the sinews, as is the case in this patient.
Box 38.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying hypochondrial
pain.
 
BOX 38.8
 
   
 
HYPOCHONDRIAL PAIN
• 
 
Liver and Gall-Bladder channels: hypochondrial pain
or distension
• 
 
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the stomach:
hypochondrial pain radiating to centre
• 
 
Stomach deficiency with secondary Liver-Qi
stagnation: epigastric pain radiating to right or left
hypochondrial region
Umbilical area
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
818
The umbilical area is influenced by the Kidney and Liver
channels and by the Directing and Penetrating Vessel. Pain in this
area is more common in children than in adults.
The most common patterns causing umbilical pain are:
 
• 
 
Cold in the abdomen
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
retention of food (more common in children).
Central-lower abdominal area
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
The central-lower abdominal area is influenced by many
different channels: the Kidney, Liver, Bladder, Small Intestine,
Directing Vessel, Penetrating Vessel and the Uterus itself. Pain in
this area is therefore often difficult to diagnose because of the
involvement of so many different channels; and the difficulties are
compounded in women because of the influence of the Uterus on
this area.
The most common patterns causing problems in this area are:
 
• 
 
stagnation of Qi – producing a pronounced feeling of
distension or distending pain
• 
 
stasis of Blood – producing a fixed, severe and
stabbing pain
• 
 
Dampness – producing a feeling of heaviness.
Apart from identifying the pattern, it is of course necessary to
identify the channel involved and this is done according to the
accompanying symptoms. In the case of the Bladder, there will be
some urinary symptoms; in the case of the Uterus, there will be
some menstrual irregularities; in the case of the Small Intestine,
there will be borborygmi, loose stools or constipation; in the case
of the Liver, there will be a pronounced distension and a clear
correlation of the abdominal problem with the emotional state.
819
Case history 38.5
 
illustrates a pattern of Blood stasis and
Deficiency causing central-lower abdominal pain.
 
Case History 38.5
A 31-year-old woman complained of abdominal pain
following a dilatation and curettage operation on her
uterus. Ten months previously she had had an
exploratory laparoscopy for a suspected ovarian cyst;
she developed complications after this operation with
an infection of the scar and a haematoma in the
abdomen. Three months after that she had a
termination of pregnancy; as she developed
complications, she was advised to have a dilatation and
curettage of her womb. Following these procedures she
developed a constant, sharp lower abdominal pain, pain
on intercourse and mid-cycle bleeding, and her
menstrual blood became dark with clots. Before all this
happened, her periods were painful but not dark and
without any mid-cycle bleeding.
Apart from the above problem, she also complained
of a pronounced tiredness and, on interrogation, it
transpired that she suffered from floaters in the
afternoon, tingling of her limbs, poor memory and
dizziness. She also complained of lower backache,
which she attributed to riding, and the occasional
tinnitus. She felt cold in general and suffered from cold
hands and feet. She occasionally also suffered from a
slight pain in the chest with a feeling of palpitations
and breathlessness, for which she used an inhaler.
Her complexion was rather pale and the 
shen
 
of her
eyes was bright. Her voice sounded clear but with a very
subtle tone of sadness to it. Her tongue was Pale in
general with paler sides, Swollen, with a Stomach crack
and a rootless coating on the root. Her pulse was Weak
and Choppy and particularly Weak on both Rear
positions; the Heart position was also particularly
Choppy.
Diagnosis:
820
In diagnosis, we must differentiate the diagnosis of her
present, acute problem (abdominal pain, dyspareunia
and mid-cycle bleeding following the dilatation and
curettage) from that of her underlying condition. The
present problem of abdominal pain is clearly due to
Blood stasis; this is clearly shown by the sharpness of
the pain and the darkness of the menstrual blood with
clots. The tongue does not show any Blood stasis (as it
is not Purple) owing to the relatively short duration of
this problem.
The underlying condition is characterized primarily
by three problems:
1. 
 
Blood deficiency (Pale tongue, floaters, tiredness,
tingling, poor memory and dizziness): there is Blood
deficiency of the Liver but also of the Heart, as is
evidenced by the palpitations, breathlessness and the
Choppy pulse on the Heart position.
2. 
 
Stomach and Spleen deficiency with some affliction
of the Intestines: the Spleen deficiency is manifested
clearly by the swelling of the sides of the tongue and the
tiredness. The Stomach deficiency is manifested by the
Stomach crack and the rootless coating: the fact that the
rootless coating is on the root of the tongue shows that
there is an intestinal pathology. It was only after I
pointed this out to her that she told that she had also
just been diagnosed as suffering from intestinal
parasites.
3. 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: this is manifested by lower
backache, feeling cold, cold feet and hands and
occasional tinnitus.
As for possible aetiology, I ventured to say that in my
opinion the main origin of the problem was emotional.
I based this primarily on the Choppiness of the pulse
(especially on the Heart pulse) and its lack of wave,
which is usually due to sadness. As I told her that I
thought sadness was the main origin of the problem,
she confirmed this by saying that she had been
repeatedly sexually abused as a child. I think this was
821
the emotional cause for the Blood deficiency (especially
of the Heart) and also of the Kidney deficiency as the
sexual abuse was obviously accompanied by fear, which
injured the Kidneys. Besides being sexually abused she
was also frequently beaten across the lower back; I
think that that, rather than riding, was the cause of the
lower backache.
Treatment:
In treatment, one must concentrate on the present,
acute problem of Blood stasis in the abdomen with a
formula to invigorate Blood and eliminate stasis such as
Sheng Hua Tang 
Generating and Transforming Decoction
 
;
this is a formula for abdominal pain from Blood stasis
after childbirth. The termination and dilatation and
curettage are somewhat energetically equivalent to
childbirth (without, of course, the pronounced
depletion of Qi and Blood that follows childbirth).
Box 38.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying pain in this area.
 
BOX 38.9
 
   
 
CENTRAL-LOWER
ABDOMINAL PAIN
• 
 
Bladder Damp-Heat: pain with frequent and difficult
urination
• 
 
Blood stasis or Damp-Heat in the Uterus: pain during
the periods, menstrual irregularities
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Small Intestine: pain with
borborygmi and loose stools or constipation
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: distending pain aggravated by
emotional stress
Right-lateral lower abdominal area
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
822
This area is influenced primarily by the Large Intestine and
Liver channels and by the Penetrating Vessel. As a rule of thumb,
problems in this area are caused by the gynaecological system
more often than by the Large 
Intestine. For example, in women,
pain in this area is very often due to ovarian cysts.
The most common patterns causing pain in this area are:
 
• 
 
stagnation of Qi – producing distension or distending
pain, or both
• 
 
stasis of Blood – producing a fixed, severe, stabbing
pain with a feeling of mass
• 
 
Dampness – accompanied by a feeling of heaviness
• 
 
Cold – producing a severe, spastic pain that is
alleviated by the application of heat.
Left-lateral lower abdominal area
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
This area is influenced by the Large Intestine, Liver and Spleen
channels and by the Penetrating Vessel. As a rule of thumb,
compared with the right-lower abdominal region, problems in this
area are often caused by the pathology of the Large Intestine. The
most common patterns causing problems in this area are the same
as those of the right-lateral lower abdominal area, that is:
 
• 
 
stagnation of Qi – producing distension or distending
pain, or both
• 
 
stasis of Blood – producing a fixed, severe, stabbing
pain with a feeling of mass
• 
 
Dampness – accompanied by a feeling of heaviness
• 
 
Cold – producing a severe, spastic pain that is
alleviated by the application of heat.
Figure 38.1
 
summarizes the most common patterns affecting
each area of the chest and abdomen.
823
FIG. 38.1
 
Main patterns in the chest and abdomen by area
824
CHAPTER 39
 
LIMBS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
WEAKNESS OF THE LIMBS
DIFFICULTY IN WALKING (ATROPHY/FLACCIDITY OF LIMBS)
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE LIMBS
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LIMBS
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE LIMBS
GENERALIZED JOINT PAIN
TREMOR OF LIMBS
UPPER LIMBS
Pain and inability to raise the shoulder
Pain in the elbow
Pain in the hands
Cold hands
Hot hands
Itchy hands
Numbness/tingling of the hands
Oedema of the hands
825
LOWER LIMBS
Pain in the hip
Pain in the thigh
Pain in the knees
Weak knees
Cramps in the calves
Cold feet
Pain in the feet
Oedema of the feet
Pain in the soles
Burning sensation in the soles
INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals with symptoms that may occur either in the
arms or in the legs, or in all four limbs. Apart from the obvious
influence of each channel on the limb it traverses, the four limbs
are influenced primarily by the Spleen and Stomach in general.
WHY
 
WE ASK
Generally speaking, questions about the four limbs are asked only
when the patient presents with a problem specific to them. The
main exceptions to this are when a patient presents with
symptoms of Blood deficiency, in which case I always ask about
numbness of the limbs, or when a patient has symptoms of
Dampness, in which case I ask about any feeling of heaviness in
the limbs.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
826
I generally ask about problems in the limbs when the patient
presents with a specific problem such as oedema, numbness or
weakness of the limbs.
I also ask about the limbs in three other situations. When I
suspect a Stomach-Qi deficiency I ask about weakness of the
limbs, when I suspect a Kidney deficiency I ask about weakness of
the knees, and when I suspect Phlegm or a Blood deficiency I ask
about numbness or tingling of the limbs.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When we ask about the limbs, we should make it clear that we
mean all four limbs – that is, whether the 
patient has a problem
such as weakness, heaviness or numbness of all limbs.
WEAKNESS OF THE LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
and
 
66
The three most common causes of weakness of the limbs are
Stomach-Qi deficiency, a general Qi and Blood deficiency and a
deficiency of Kidney-Yang. The Stomach carries the food essences
to the four limbs and for this reason a weakness of Stomach-Qi is
the most common cause of a feeling of weakness of the limbs. The
Kidneys carry food essences and Blood to the legs; a weakness of
the limbs in the elderly is more likely to be due to a Kidney
deficiency.
Box 39.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying weakness of the
limbs.
 
BOX 39.1
 
   
 
WEAKNESS OF LIMBS
• 
 
Stomach-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
827
DIFFICULTY IN WALKING
(ATROPHY/FLACCIDITY OF LIMBS
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Atrophy or flaccidity of the limbs causes a difficulty in walking;
the most common example of this in Western patients is multiple
sclerosis.
In the beginning stages, atrophy or flaccidity of the limbs is
often due to a Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency, failing to carry
food essences to the limbs. In later stages, atrophy or flaccidity of
the limbs, or both, is often due to a Yin deficiency of the Liver and
Kidneys or a Yang deficiency of the Spleen and Kidneys.
Atrophy or flaccidity of the limbs in children is due to a
deficiency of Kidney-Essence. A general deficiency of Qi and Blood
may also cause atrophy or flaccidity of the limbs.
Box 39.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying difficulty in
walking.
 
BOX 39.2
 
   
 
DIFFICULTY IN WALKING
• 
 
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency
• 
 
Deficiency of Kidney-Essence (in children)
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE
LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
The five most common causes of a feeling of distension of the
limbs are:
 
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Qi stagnation with Dampness
• 
 
Blood stasis from Qi deficiency
• 
 
Wind-Phlegm
828
• 
 
Dampness in the muscles.
Qi stagnation causes a feeling of distension of the limbs,
particularly in the hands and feet.
If the feeling of distension of the limbs is accompanied by a
swelling under the skin and a sallow complexion, then it is due to
Qi stagnation with Dampness. It should be noted that this
swelling is not real oedema and finger pressure does not leave a
dip in the skin. This type of distension and swelling of the limbs is
very common in women suffering from premenstrual syndrome.
If the feeling of distension of the limbs is aggravated by
overexertion and the lower legs have a purple colour, it is due to
Blood stasis deriving from Qi deficiency.
If the feeling of distension of the limbs is accompanied by
numbness, tingling, a feeling of heaviness and tremor, it is due to
Wind-Phlegm.
A feeling of distension of the limbs may also be due to retention
of Dampness in the muscles, which may 
be associated with Cold
or Heat; in this case, there would also be a feeling of heaviness of
the limbs.
Box 39.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a feeling of
distension of the limbs.
 
BOX 39.3
 
   
 
FEELING OF DISTENSION
OF THE LIMBS
• 
 
Qi stagnation: feeling of distension especially in
hands and feet
• 
 
Qi stagnation with Dampness: feeling of distension
with swelling, sallow complexion
• 
 
Blood stasis from Qi deficiency: feeling of distension
with weakness, purple colour of legs, aggravated by
overwork
• 
 
Wind-Phlegm: feeling of distension, numbness,
tingling, feeling of heaviness, tremor
• 
 
Dampness: feeling of distension and heaviness
829
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE
LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
and
 
66
Patients quite often spontaneously report a sensation of
heaviness of the limbs although they may not necessarily use such
terms. They often say that their legs ‘feel like lead’.
A feeling of heaviness of the limbs is more frequently
experienced in the legs. A feeling of heaviness of the legs is always
due to Dampness in the Lower Burner. The Dampness may be
combined with Heat or Cold, and it may be Full or Empty. The
feeling of heaviness from Full-Dampness is more pronounced than
that from Dampness associated with Spleen-Qi deficiency.
When the Spleen-Qi deficiency is associated with Stomach-Qi
deficiency, the feeling of heaviness is frequently experienced in all
four limbs rather than just the legs. Similarly, when Phlegm causes
a feeling of heaviness, it is experienced in all four limbs.
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
Muscle ache in the limbs is nearly always due to retention of
Dampness in the space between skin and muscles. This may be a
Full or an Empty condition (associated with Spleen-Qi deficiency)
and the Dampness may or may not be combined with Heat. If it is
combined with Heat, the ache is more intense. In addition to the
ache, there is a pronounced feeling of heaviness of the limbs. In a
few cases, muscle ache in the limbs may be due to Liver-Blood
deficiency, in which case it would be very mild and associated with
tingling.
Muscle ache in the limbs is a common symptom in postviral
fatigue syndrome.
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE LIMBS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
‘Numbness’ here includes tingling in the limbs. Generally
830
speaking, a feeling of numbness/tingling may be due to:
 
• 
 
Wind
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Dampness or Damp-Heat
• 
 
stagnation of Qi and Blood.
Blood deficiency usually causes tingling, whereas Phlegm and
Wind tend to cause more numbness: with Wind, the numbness is
often unilateral. However, these are only general rules.
Blood deficiency is a common cause of numbness/tingling of the
limbs in younger people, especially women. In the elderly, a
numbness of the limbs is very often caused by Wind or Wind-
Phlegm obstructing the channels and, in the case of Wind, the
numbness is often unilateral. Dampness or Damp-Heat may also
cause numbness of the limbs and especially of the legs. In a few
cases, numbness may be caused by stagnation of Qi and Blood in
the limbs, in which case it is relieved by exercise.
Box 39.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying numbness/tingling
of the limbs.
 
BOX 39.4
 
   
 
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF
THE LIMBS
• 
 
Blood deficiency: more tingling, common in women
• 
 
Wind: more numbness, often unilateral, common in
the elderly
• 
 
Phlegm: more numbness, with feeling of heaviness
• 
 
Dampness or Damp-Heat: numbness especially of
legs, with swelling
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi and Blood: with pain, relieved by
exercise
GENERALIZED JOINT PAIN
Pain in multiple joints is generally due to Wind (Wind Painful
831
Obstruction Syndrome) combined with Dampness or Cold, or
both. If the site of the pain moves, affecting different joints every
day, this strongly indicates Wind. A severe pain indicates Cold,
whereas swelling of the joints indicates Dampness. In chronic
conditions, Dampness frequently combines with Heat and causes
swelling, redness and heat of the joints.
Generalized joint pain may also be caused by Qi stagnation; in
this case, the pain is alleviated by gentle exercise. Blood stasis may
also cause generalized joint pain; in this case, the pain is intense
and often worse at night. Finally, a general deficiency of Qi and
Blood may cause a dull, mild joint ache that improves with rest.
Case history 39.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying generalized
joint pain.
 
Case History 39.1
A 50-year-old woman had been suffering from
osteoarthritis for the past year. There had been a
sudden onset of the condition after the patient had
suffered a severe shock. The pain, which was stabbing
in nature, had first affected the elbow, shoulder and
neck; however, it spread to all the other joints after the
patient was put in neck traction. The joints were not
swollen. The patient said she felt like she ‘was being
crushed inside’. The pain was alleviated by taking a hot
bath and made worse by damp or cold weather and
stress.
She had had four children. During her first
pregnancy, she suffered from repeated kidney
infections; during her third pregnancy she developed
asthma; during her fourth pregnancy she developed a
pre-eclampsia condition with high blood pressure. Her
blood pressure had remained high ever since and she
was on medication for this.
The patient had a tendency towards constipation and
said that she had no energy. She started taking
hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 5 years previously,
after suffering from hot flushes, lethargy and mood
swings. She had continued to suffer from recurrent
kidney infections since her first pregnancy.
832
The tongue body was Reddish-Purple, Swollen and
with cracks in the Stomach and Spleen area. The tongue
coating was very thin. The pulse was Slippery in general
and Weak in both Rear positions.
Diagnosis:
The widespread and moving joint pain, which is
aggravated by exposure to damp and cold weather,
indicates Painful Obstruction Syndrome from Wind and
Cold. Wind is indicated by the moving pain, while Cold
is indicated by the intensity of the pain and its
aggravation from exposure to cold. The absence of
swelling of the joints indicates that there is no
pronounced Dampness.
The stabbing joint pain is caused by Blood stasis in
the channels which was brought on by the sudden
shock the patient experienced just prior to the onset of
the symptoms. Being put in neck traction, with the
consequent restriction of movement, would have only
exacerbated the Blood stasis. Blood stasis is obvious
from the Purple colour of the tongue body and the
stabbing nature of the joint pain. The hypertension is
caused by Kidney deficiency and retention of Phlegm,
which itself has come about as a result of the long-
standing Kidney deficiency and which is evidenced by
the Swollen tongue and Slippery pulse.
There is an underlying Kidney deficiency, which is
predominantly a deficiency of Kidney-Yin. This
probably originated during her first pregnancy at the
age of 16 when she suffered from kidney problems, and
was exacerbated by her third pregnancy which was
when she developed asthma, and further aggravated
during the fourth pregnancy when she developed a pre-
eclampsia condition. Other signs and symptoms of
Kidney-Yin deficiency are the hot flushes the patient
suffered before going on HRT, the tendency towards
constipation, and the lack of tongue coating.
I interpreted the expression she used ‘feeling like
833
being crushed inside’ as strongly suggestive of the
emotional origin (shock) of her problem.
Box 39.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying generalized joint
pain.
 
BOX 39.5
 
   
 
GENERALIZED JOINT PAIN
• 
 
Wind: pain moving from joint to joint
• 
 
Cold: severe pain
• 
 
Dampness: dull ache with swelling of joints
• 
 
Damp-heat: chronic ache and swelling of joints
• 
 
Qi stagnation: pain in the joints that is alleviated by
exercise
• 
 
Blood stasis: severe pain, often worse at night
• 
 
Qi and Blood deficiency: generalized mild ache that is
better with rest
TREMOR OF THE LIMBS
Observation,
 
Chapters 4
 
and
 
18
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
A tremor of the limbs always indicates Liver-Wind; we should
therefore establish the source of Liver-Wind and whether it is Full-
or Empty-Wind. The root cause of Liver-Wind may be Heat during
an acute febrile disease, Liver-Fire, Liver-Yang rising, a deficiency
of Yin of the Liver or Kidneys, or both, and Liver-Blood deficiency.
The last two types of Wind are of the Empty type, whereas all the
others are of the Full type.
Full Wind is characterized by pronounced tremors or
convulsions (during an acute febrile disease), vertigo, unilateral
numbness and a Wiry pulse. Empty -Wind is 
characterized by fine
tremors or tics, mild dizziness, tingling and a Choppy or Fine and
slightly Wiry pulse.
The tongue indicating Liver-Wind may be Moving, Deviated or
Stiff.
834
Case histories 39.2
 
and 
39.3
 
illustrate tremor caused by Liver-
Wind.
 
Case History 39.2
A 45-year-old man had been suffering from a fine
tremor of his right arm for 3 years. He had seen a
neurologist who excluded the diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease. This patient had very few other symptoms,
complaining only of a feeling of heat in the head, cold
hands and feet, floaters, an occasional itch in the left
eye and occasional heat and dryness in both eyes. His
skin was also rather dry and he had been suffering from
myopia from the age of 8.
His body type was a mixture of Metal and Wood. His
tongue was slightly Thin, Red on the sides and not
enough coating in the centre. His pulse was slightly
Wiry on the left and Weak on the right, most of all on
the Lung position.
Diagnosis:
The tremor of the arm is an unmistakable sign of Liver-
Wind and we should establish the root pattern giving
rise to Wind. In this case, it is Liver-Blood and Liver-Yin
deficiency. The symptoms of Liver-Blood deficiency are
floaters, itch of the left eye, dry skin, myopia from
childhood, Weak pulse on the right, while dryness of
the eyes and the lack of coating on the tongue indicate
Liver-Yin deficiency. There are also some symptoms of
Liver-Yang rising (feeling of heat in the head and eyes,
Red sides of the tongue) and of Liver-Qi stagnation
(cold hands and feet). The Wiry pulse may be related to
any of the Full Liver patterns. In Liver disharmonies, it
is not unusual to have a combination of several
different patterns.
There are no symptoms or signs corresponding to the
weakness of the Lung pulse, which is not unusual for
this organ. When the Lung pulse is the weakest of all
the pulse positions, I usually relate this to emotional
problems due to sadness and grief.
835
 
Case History 39.3
A 45-year-old woman had been suffering from a fine
tremor of the left arm for 1 year. She also experienced
numbness and tingling of the left arm. She had very
few other symptoms, except for her periods being quite
scanty.
Her tongue was Pale and slightly Thin and her pulse
was Fine and Wiry.
Diagnosis:
This is a clear example of Empty-Wind deriving from
Blood deficiency. The Blood deficiency is evident from
the Pale and Thin tongue and Fine pulse, while the
Wind is evident from the Wiry pulse and obviously the
tremor of the arm.
Box 39.6
 
summarizes the patterns of Liver-Wind.
 
BOX 39.6
 
   
 
LIVER-WIND
• 
 
Full type: pronounced tremors, convulsions, vertigo,
unilateral numbness of a limb, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Empty type: fine tremors, tics, mild dizziness, tingling
of limbs, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse
UPPER LIMBS
Pain And Inability To Raise The Shoulder
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Inability to raise the shoulder, which is nearly always
accompanied by pain in the shoulder, is a very common complaint,
especially after the age of 40.
The most common cause of inability to raise the shoulder is
chronic retention of Cold in the joint owing to successive
836
exposures to cold and damp weather; this syndrome falls under
the category of Painful Obstruction Syndrome. In this case the
pain is worse with rest and better with exercise, aggravated by
exposure to cold and alleviated by exposure to heat and by wearing
warm clothes.
Another common cause of this problem is sprain of the
shoulder joint, which leads to local stagnation of Qi and Blood; in
this case the pain is better with gentle exercise and worse with
rest.
In old people, chronic inability to raise the shoulder is often due
to local Blood stasis and this may be a consequence of chronic
retention of Cold or repetitive strain. In this case, the inability to
raise the shoulder is very pronounced and there is severe pain and
stiffness that are worse at night.
In rare cases, an inability to raise the shoulder accompanies
Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome, in 
which case the patient
suffers from chest pain, breathlessness and palpitations.
Box 39.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying pain and inability
to raise the shoulder.
 
BOX 39.7
 
   
 
PAIN AND INABILITY TO
RAISE THE SHOULDER
• 
 
Cold in the joint: Painful Obstruction Syndrome pain
better with exercise, worse with rest, aggravated by cold,
ameliorated by warmth
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi and Blood: pain better with exercise,
worse with rest
• 
 
Local Blood stasis: severe pain and stiffness, worse at
night
• 
 
General Blood stasis: Chest Painful Obstruction
Syndrome (Chest 
Bi
 
) with breathlessness, palpitations
Pain In The Elbow
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Pain in the elbow is usually due either to retention of Cold or to
local stagnation of Qi and Blood due to repetitive strain injury. In
837
the case of retention of Cold, the pain is severe and is aggravated
by exposure to cold and alleviated by the application of heat. In
the case of stagnation of Qi and Blood, the pain is aggravated by
rest and slightly ameliorated by movement.
Box 39.8
 
summarizes patterns underlying elbow pain.
 
BOX 39.8
 
   
 
PAIN IN THE ELBOW
• 
 
Retention of Cold: severe pain aggravated by cold and
ameliorated by warmth
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi and Blood: pain ameliorated by
exercise
Pain In The Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Pain in the hands may be of a Full or Empty nature: in Full
conditions the pain is severe, whereas in Empty conditions it is
dull.
The three most common causes are retention of Cold, Dampness
or Wind (or a combination of these) in the hands; this falls under
the category of Painful Obstruction Syndrome. When the hand
pain is due to Cold, it is intense, aggravated by exposure to cold
and alleviated by application of heat. When it is due to Dampness,
there is swelling of the fingers. When due to Wind, the pain in the
hands is usually associated with pain in other joints.
Pain in the hands may also be due to Liver-Qi stagnation, in
which case it may be accompanied by pain in the feet. In chronic
cases, Qi stagnation will lead to Blood stasis and this may cause a
severe pain in the fingers, which is worse at night, and a
pronounced stiffness in them.
Blood deficiency may cause a dull ache in the hands. This is due
to deficient Blood not reaching the hands and causing a minor
local stagnation; it is more common in women. Yang deficiency
may also cause a dull ache in the hands, similar to Blood
deficiency, and, in addition, the hands have a pronounced cold
feeling.
Box 39.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying hand pain.
838
 
BOX 39.9
 
   
 
PAIN IN THE HANDS
• 
 
Severe hand pain aggravated by cold: Cold Painful
Obstruction Syndrome
• 
 
Hand pain with swelling: Damp Painful Obstruction
Syndrome
• 
 
Pain in the hands and other joints: Wind Painful
Obstruction Syndrome
• 
 
Hand pain with swelling and heat: Damp-Heat in the
joints
• 
 
Pain in the hands and feet: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Severe pain in the hands and fingers that is worse at
night and with stiffness: Blood stasis
• 
 
Dull ache in the hands: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Dull ache in the hands ameliorated by heat, cold
hands: Yang deficiency
Cold Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
Cold hands are due to three possible causes: Yang deficiency
(the most common one), Blood deficiency and Qi stagnation.
Yang deficiency causing cold hands is most commonly of the
Spleen, Lungs or Heart; it is ameliorated by the application of heat.
Blood deficiency, especially of the Heart, may also cause cold
hands; it is accompanied by palpitations and dizziness, and is
more frequent in women. Liver-Qi stagnation may also cause cold
hands but in conjunction with cold feet; this is called the ‘Four
Rebellious Syndrome’ in which the ‘four rebellious’ indicate cold
hands and feet. The famous formula Si Ni San 
Four Rebellious
Powder
 
is used for this pattern. An important difference between
cold limbs due to Yang deficiency and cold limbs due to Qi
stagnation 
is that in the former case the whole limb will be cold,
whereas in the latter case only the hands and feet, particularly the
fingers and toes, are cold.
In the case of deficiency of Yang or Blood, the cold feeling is due
to deficient Yang-Qi or Blood not reaching the extremities; in the
839
case of Liver-Qi stagnation, Qi does not reach the extremities
because it stagnates in the body.
Box 39.10
 
summarizes the patterns underlying cold hands.
 
BOX 39.10
 
   
 
COLD HANDS
• 
 
Dull ache in the hands ameliorated by heat, cold
hands: Yang deficiency
• 
 
Cold hands with palpitations and dizziness: Heart-
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Cold fingers and toes: Liver-Qi stagnation
Hot Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
To diagnose the significance of hot hands, we must first of all
differentiate between exterior and interior syndromes. In exterior
syndromes due to invasion of Wind, the dorsum of the hands feels
hot to the touch while the patient feels cold, and an aversion to
cold, in general. The acute onset, simultaneous subjective cold
feeling of the patient (to the point of shivering) and the objective
feeling of heat in the dorsum of the hands characterize the initial
stages of an invasion of Wind.
In interior conditions, hot hands are due to either Full- or
Empty-Heat usually of the Lungs, Heart or Stomach. In Full-Heat
the whole hand feels hot, whereas in Empty-Heat especially the
palms feel hot.
Box 39.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying hot hands.
 
BOX 39.11
 
   
 
HOT HANDS
• 
 
Hot dorsum of the hands with acute onset and
aversion to cold: invasion of external Wind
• 
 
Chronic hot dorsum of the hands: Full-Heat (Lungs,
Heart or Stomach)
• 
 
Chronic hot palms: Empty-Heat (Lungs or Heart)
840
Itchy Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 64
A common cause of itchiness of the hands is Dampness, which
may be associated with Heat. With Dampness, the itchiness of the
hands is associated with a swelling of the fingers and often small,
white vesicles; with Damp-Heat the itching is more intense and is
associated with swelling and redness of the fingers.
Another possible cause of itchiness of the hands is Blood
deficiency leading to Wind in the skin.
Box 39.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying itchy hands.
 
BOX 39.12
 
   
 
ITCHY HANDS
• 
 
Dampness: with white vesicles
• 
 
Damp-Heat: intense itching
• 
 
Blood deficiency with Wind in the skin: mild itching
Numbness/Tingling Of The Hands
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 65
When asking patients about numbness, it is important to
explain to them that this includes any feeling of tingling (in Britain
often called ‘pins and needles’).
Causes of numbness or tingling of the hands include:
 
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Qi and Blood stagnation
• 
 
Wind.
Blood deficiency is a common cause of numbness/tingling of the
hands, especially tingling. Phlegm may also cause
numbness/tingling of the hands and especially numbness.
Another less common cause of numbness/tingling of the hands is
chronic Qi and Blood stagnation. Unilateral numbness or tingling
of the first three fingers in an old person may indicate the
841
possibility of impending Wind-stroke.
Oedema Of The Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
 
and
 
65
Oedema of the hands may be due to Lung-Yang deficiency or
Spleen-Yang deficiency; in this case the oedema is pitting. If the
oedema is not pitting it is due to Qi stagnation.
LOWER LIMBS
Pain In The Hip
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of hip pain is invasion of Cold and
Dampness in the hip joint, in which case the pain 
is unilateral,
severe in nature and with marked rigidity of the joint.
In the elderly, hip pain is often due to chronic stagnation of Qi
and stasis of Blood affecting the Gall-Bladder channel.
Pain In The Thigh
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Pain in the thigh may be due to retention of Dampness in the
muscles which may be associated with Heat or Cold; in this case,
the pain radiates to the groin.
Chronic thigh pain may also be due to Qi deficiency with Blood
stasis, or to Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Pain In The Knees
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of pain in the knees is invasion of Cold
and this falls under the category of Painful Obstruction Syndrome.
Invasion of Cold in the knee causes a severe pain, which is usually
unilateral, and rigidity. Cold is often associated with Dampness, in
which case the knee is also swollen. When Dampness is retained
for a long time it may transform into Damp-Heat, in which case
the knee is painful, swollen and hot.
842
Another common cause of pain in the knee is sprain due to
working conditions, which usually causes local stagnation of Qi
and Blood. It is ameliorated by gentle exercise.
Dull knee ache which improves with rest, has a gradual onset
and is associated with weakness of the knees is due to Kidney
deficiency.
Box 39.13
 
summarizes the patterns underlying knee pain.
 
BOX 39.13
 
   
 
PAIN IN THE KNEES
• 
 
Invasion of Cold: severe pain with rigidity, usually
unilateral
• 
 
Damp-Cold: pain and swelling
• 
 
Damp-Heat: pain, swelling and hot to the touch
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi and Blood: better with exercise
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: chronic ache of gradual onset,
better with rest
Weak Knees
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of weak knees is a deficiency of the
Kidneys. A chronic deficiency of Stomach and Spleen may also
cause a weakness of the knees.
Cramps In The Calves
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of cramps in the calves is Liver-Blood
deficiency. This symptom is more common in the elderly and it
frequently occurs at night. If the cramps are very severe and are
accompanied by numbness of the legs, this may indicate the
presence of Empty-Wind stemming from Liver-Blood deficiency.
Cramps in the calves may also be caused by a combination of
Wind and Phlegm in the limbs and this generally occurs only in
patients over 70 years of age. If cramps in the calves are
accompanied by pain, this indicates that, in addition to Liver-
Blood deficiency, there is also Liver-Blood stasis.
843
Cold Feet
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
The most common cause of cold feet is Kidney-Yang deficiency;
indeed, this symptom is a relatively important one to diagnose a
Kidney-Yang deficiency. Another possible cause of cold feet,
especially in women, is Liver-Blood deficiency.
Obstruction of Phlegm in the Lower Burner may also cause the
feet to be cold.
Pain In The Feet
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
By ‘pain in the foot’, we mean a localized pain, usually
unilateral, without swelling or redness. It is therefore different
from the pain in the joints due to invasion of Wind, Cold or
Dampness causing Painful Obstruction Syndrome. Pain in the foot
may occur on the dorsum, the sides or the soles and the three most
common causes of it are a Kidney deficiency (which may be of Yin
or Yang), Blood deficiency and Dampness or Phlegm.
Dampness produces pain with swelling, and in Damp-Heat
there is also redness and Heat. Phlegm causes a pain with
numbness and tingling. A pain in the ball of the foot which is
aggravated by walking if the patient is overweight is due to Damp-
Phlegm.
Pain that is due to Blood deficiency is a chronic pain with
tingling.
When the pain extends from the side of the foot towards the
sole, it is usually due to Kidney-Yang deficiency; if due to Kidney-
Yin deficiency it is accompanied by a feeling of heat of the soles,
and is worse at night.
In addition, a severe pain may be due to Cold.
Box 39.14
 
summarizes the patterns underlying foot pain.
 
BOX 39.14
 
   
 
PAIN IN THE FEET
• 
 
Dampness: pain with swelling
• 
 
Damp-Heat: pain, swelling, redness and heat
• 
 
Blood deficiency: chronic pain and tingling
• 
 
Phlegm: pain, numbness and tingling
844
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm: pain in ball of foot with overweight
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: pain and weakness
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: pain worse at night, feeling of
heat in the soles
• 
 
Cold: severe pain
Oedema Of The Feet
Observation,
 
Chapters 18
 
and
 
19
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 64
,
 
66
 
,
 
68
Oedema of the feet is usually due to Kidney-Yang deficiency; in
this case the oedema is pitting. If the oedema is not pitting, it is
due to Qi stagnation. Oedema is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 18
 
.
Pain In The Soles
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
We can differentiate three distinct areas of the sole (
Fig 39.1
 
):
the ball of the foot, which pertains to the Stomach channel; the
area under the big toe, which pertains to the Liver and Spleen
channels, and the rest of the sole, which pertains to the Kidney
channel. Therefore a pain in the ball of the foot is often due to a
Stomach-Qi deficiency with invasion of Dampness in the limbs or
to Stomach-Heat, while a pain below thebig toe is often due to
Liver-Fire or Dampness in the Spleen.
845
FIG. 39.1
 
Areas of the sole
A pain in the sole proper is generally due to a Kidney deficiency
(Yin or Yang), also with invasion of Dampness.
Burning Sensation In The Soles
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
A burning sensation of the soles may be due to Full-Heat of the
Liver or Stomach. If it is in the Liver, only the area under the big
toe will feel hot; if it is in the Stomach, the ball of the foot will feel
hot.
However, the most common cause of burning sensation in the
soles proper is a deficiency of Kidney-Yin, usually with Empty-
Heat; in such a case, the burning sensation is worse in the evening
and at night.
846
CHAPTER 40
 
SLEEP
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
INSOMNIA
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
SOMNOLENCE
INTRODUCTION
Sleep disturbances are very common in Western patients; when
asking a patient about a sleep problem, it is important to clarify
whether there is difficulty in falling or staying asleep, waking up
early in the morning or excessive dreaming.
WHY
 
WE ASK
It is essential to ask every patient about their sleep because this
gives an indication of the state of the Mind (
Shen
 
) and Ethereal
Soul (
Hun
 
). A disturbance of the Mind or Ethereal Soul, or both, is
of course extremely common in Western patients whose lives are
generally subject to a considerable amount of stress.
The length of sleep needed varies according to age and, in
general, it gradually decreases in one’s lifetime, being highest in
847
babies and lowest in the elderly. We should therefore take age into
account when judging whether the patient’s sleep is adequate or
not.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I ask about sleep and dreaming early on in the consultation in
every case. Even if a patient does not apparently present with any
problems of that kind, I always ask about sleep and dreaming to
get an idea of the state of the Mind and Ethereal Soul.
HOW
 
WE ASK
It is important to be specific when asking about sleep and
dreaming; it will not suffice to ask ‘Do you sleep 
well?’ I generally
ask patients whether they fall asleep easily, whether they wake up
during the night and whether they dream excessively. The last
symptom is difficult to define as we all dream: dreaming seems to
be an essential part of sleep, performing a function that is still the
subject of debate and disagreement. What, therefore, constitutes
‘excessive’ dreaming in Chinese medicine? I personally think this
can be defined either as having many dreams, to the point of
feeling exhausted in the morning because of them, or as having
unpleasant dreams which leave one tired and slightly disturbed in
the morning or even wake one up during the night.
If the patient dreams excessively, I then ask whether there is any
recurrent dream. Apart from a modern psychological
interpretation of dreams according to the theories of Freud, Jung
and others, I always try to interpret recurrent dreams in terms of
Chinese medicine. The ‘Simple Questions’ has a long list of
dreams with their significance in Chinese medicine and these are
listed in 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 81
 
. For example, recurrent dreams of
water usually indicate a Kidney deficiency (while in Jungian
psychology water is a symbol of the unconscious).
INSOMNIA
848
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 81
In general, sleep depends on the state of Blood and Yin,
especially of the Heart and Liver, although the Blood and Yin of
other organs also influences sleep. During the night Yin energy
predominates and the Mind and the Ethereal Soul should be
anchored in the Heart-Blood and Liver-Blood respectively (
Fig 40.1
).
FIG. 40.1
 
Heart-Blood and Liver-Blood as anchors of the Mind and
Ethereal Soul
A sleep disturbance may be due to the Mind or the Ethereal Soul
not being anchored in the Heart-Blood(or Heart-Yin) or the Liver-
Blood (or Liver-Yin) respectively; this can happen either because
there is not enough Blood or Yin to anchor the Mind or the
Ethereal Soul, or both, or because a pathogenic factor (such as
Heat) agitates them. The former is an Empty type of sleep
disturbance, the latter a Full type. In both cases, the Mind or the
Ethereal Soul is said to ‘float’ at night causing insomnia (
Fig 40.2
 
).
849
FIG. 40.2
 
Pathology of insomnia
In general, in Deficiency, a difficulty in falling asleep indicates a
Blood deficiency of the Heart, Spleen or Liver, whereas difficulty in
staying asleep and a tendency to wake up during the night indicate
a Yin deficiency. Of course, waking up during the night may also be
due to a Full condition such as Heat, Fire, Phlegm-Fire or retention
of food.
 
A difficulty in falling asleep generally indicates a
deficiency of Blood or Yin; waking during the night
generally indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
When diagnosing sleep disturbances it is important to
distinguish, first, a Full from an Empty condition and, secondly, a
Heart from a Liver pattern. Full conditions are characterized by
very restless sleep with a feeling of heat, agitation and excessive
dreaming; Empty conditions are characterized by not being able to
fall or stay asleep without any of the above symptoms. A Liver
pattern causing insomnia is characterized by excessive dreaming
and, compared with a Heart pattern, a more severe restlessness.
However, the Heart and Liver are not the only organs that may
cause insomnia: the Stomach, Spleen, Kidneys and Gall-Bladder
may all play a role in insomnia. For example, a deficiency of
Spleen-Blood often accompanies a deficiency of Heart-Blood and
contributes 
to causing insomnia (the famous formula Gui Pi Tang
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
treats insomnia from these patterns).
Kidney-Yin, like Liver-Yin, also needs to anchor the Mind and the
850
Ethereal Soul at night; therefore a deficiency of Kidney-Yin, with or
without Empty-Heat, is also a frequent cause of insomnia.
A deficiency of the Gall-Bladder may cause someone to wake up
early in the morning without being able to fall asleep again.
A less common cause of insomnia is residual Heat in the
diaphragm, which may occur after an invasion of Wind-Heat; this
is obviously an acute type of insomnia with recent onset.
For a detailed description of the patterns causing insomnia see
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 81
 
. 
Figure 40.3
 
illustrates the aetiology and
pathology of insomnia differentiated into the main Empty and Full
patterns.
FIG. 40.3
 
Aetiology and pathology of insomnia 
(Reproduced with
permission from Maciocia G 1994 The Practice of Chinese Medicine, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
The main patterns appearing in insomnia are summarized in
Box 40.1
 
.
 
BOX 40.1
 
   
 
INSOMNIA
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: insomnia with difficulty in
falling asleep, palpitations, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Spleen and Heart:
insomnia with difficulty in falling asleep, palpitations,
tiredness, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency: insomnia with difficulty in
falling asleep, palpitations, tongue without coating,
851
Floating-Empty pulse
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: insomnia with difficulty in
falling asleep, dreaming, dizziness, blurred vision, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency: insomnia with difficulty in
falling asleep, dreaming, dizziness, blurred vision, dry
eyes, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse
• 
 
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: insomnia with
difficulty in falling asleep, dizziness, tinnitus, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse
• 
 
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat: insomnia, waking up frequently during the night
with a dry mouth, dreaming, anxiety, night sweating,
dizziness, tinnitus, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: insomnia with
difficulty in staying asleep, blurred vision, dry eyes, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and slightly
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Gall-Bladder deficiency: easily awakened at night and
easily startled with difficulty in going back to sleep, or
apt to wake up early in the morning, depression,
timidity, hypochondrial discomfort, palpitations
• 
 
Liver-Fire: insomnia, excessive dreaming, restless
sleep, propensity to outbursts of anger, headaches, Red
tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Stomach/Heart: restless
sleep, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, sputum in
throat, Red tongue with redder tip and a sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: restless sleep, dream-disturbed sleep,
palpitations, agitation, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Residual Heat in the diaphragm: restless sleep,
preference for sleeping propped up, inability to fall
asleep, mental restlessness, a feeling of oppression of
the diaphragm, red points in the front or around the
852
centre of the tongue, slightly Rapid pulse
• 
 
Full-Heat (Heart, Liver or Stomach), Phlegm-Fire
(Stomach and/or Heart): restless sleep with excessive
dreaming
• 
 
Retention of food: restless sleep with abdominal
fullness
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 81
Excessive dreaming is another common sleep disturbance,
which is usually due to a pathogenic factor agitating the Ethereal
Soul; this may be either a pathogenic factor such as Fire or
Phlegm-Fire, or such a one as Empty-Heat deriving from Yin
deficiency.
‘Excessive dreaming’ is difficult to define because dreaming is a
normal, physiological aspect of sleep. From the perspective of
Chinese medicine it can be defined as a level of dreaming, whether
pleasant or unpleasant, that makes the sleeper restless or wakes
the patient up; it also includes nightmares, especially when they
are recurrent. Other doctors define ‘excessive dreaming’ as waking
up with an unpleasant feeling from dreaming; by implication,
from a Chinese perspective, ‘normal’ dreaming is not remembered
in the morning.
‘Excessive dreaming’ was called 
Ye You
 
, which means ‘wandering
at night’, or 
Meng You
 
, which means ‘wandering in one’s dream’,
or 
Meng Xing,
 
which means ‘moving in one’s dream’: all these
terms are a clear reference to the wandering of the Ethereal Soul at
night when we dream too much.
With the exception of Heart and Gall-Bladder deficiency,
excessive dreaming is usually caused by a Full condition, generally
of the Liver or Heart, such as Liver-Fire, Heart-Fire or Phlegm-Fire
in the Heart. Full conditions of the Stomach also frequently cause
excessive dreaming, especially Phlegm-Fire in the Stomach and
retention of food.
The main patterns causing excessive dreaming are summarized
853
in 
Box 40.2
 
.
 
BOX 40.2
 
   
 
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
• 
 
Liver-Fire: excessive dreaming, nightmares, restless
sleep, headaches, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: excessive dreaming, restless sleep,
palpitations, insomnia, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart: excessive dreaming,
restless sleep, insomnia, waking up from nightmares,
palpitations, agitation, sputum in throat, Red tongue
with redder tip and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Overflowing Rapid pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire in the Stomach: excessive, agitated
dreams, restless sleep, burning epigastric pain,
insomnia, Red tongue with a sticky yellow or dark-
yellow (or even black) coating, Stomach crack with a
rough, sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid
and slightly Overflowing pulse on the Right-Middle
position
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: dream-
disturbed sleep, insomnia, Red tongue with redder tip
and without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: dream-
disturbed sleep, insomnia, blurred vision, dry eyes, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and slightly
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat:
dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, dizziness, tinnitus,
Red tongue with redder tip without coating, midline
Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse, or Deep-
Weak on both Rear positions and relatively Overflowing
on both Front positions
• 
 
Heart and Gall-Bladder deficiency: excessive
dreaming, waking up easily from dreaming,
absentmindedness, emotionally unstable, anxiety and
palpitations
854
SOMNOLENCE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 44
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 81
 
.
Somnolence means dozing off frequently in the daytime or early
evening. Some Chinese books also add that the patient wakes up
as he or she breathes out and then dozes off again. ‘Somnolence’
also includes some people’s physiological need of sleeping a
longer time than normal, which, in adults, is approximately 7–8
hours.
Somnolence may be due to Deficiency, usually of Qi or Yang, or
both, or to Excess, such as Dampness or Phlegm. The most
common situation is a combination of Deficiency (of the Spleen or
Kidneys, or both) and a Full condition consisting of Dampness or
Phlegm.
Of course, when a patient complains of somnolence, one should
first of all enquire about the patient’s working hours: if the person
works very long hours (a very common occurrence in Western
industrializedsocieties) then somnolence is not a pathological
symptom.
For a detailed description of the patterns causing somnolence,
see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 81
 
.
Box 40.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying somnolence.
 
BOX 40.3
 
   
 
SOMNOLENCE
• 
 
Spleen-Yang deficiency: somnolence, desire to lie
down, loose stools, Pale tongue, Weak pulse
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: somnolence, listlessness,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, Pale-Swollen tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse
• 
 
Dampness: somnolence after eating, feeling of
heaviness, sticky coating, Slippery pulse
• 
 
Phlegm: somnolence after eating and in the morning,
muzziness of the head, dizziness, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Slippery pulse
855
CHAPTER 41
 
SWEATING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SWEATING
Exterior patterns
Interior patterns
PATHOLOGY OF SWEATING
CLASSIFICATION OF SWEATING
Area of body
Time of day
Condition of illness
Quality of sweat
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
INTRODUCTION
Excessive sweating is always considered a symptom requiring the
doctor’s attention in Chinese medicine. In order to define
‘excessive sweating’ we should bear in mind that under certain
circumstances sweating is a normal physiological process. For
856
example, it is normal to sweat during exercise, after eating spicy
foods, in very hot weather and when under emotional strain.
WHY
 
WE ASK
Daytime spontaneous sweating is not a crucial area of questioning
for various reasons. First of all, it is a symptom that only Chinese
patients are particularly aware of and which they therefore often
report spontaneously. Western patients report this symptom quite
rarely. In terms of clinical significance as part of a pattern, daytime
spontaneous sweating is seldom a crucial manifestation that
clinches a diagnosis.
An exception to this occurs when we see a patient during an
acute invasion of Wind, in which case we should always ask
whether there is sweating or not. The presence of sweating
indicates that the pathogenic factor is either Wind-Heat or Wind-
Cold but with the prevalence of Wind (Wind Attack Pattern of the
Greater-Yang Pattern) and that the patient’s Upright Qi is relatively
weak. Conversely, absence of sweating during an invasion of
external Wind generally indicates that Cold predominates over
Wind and that the patient’s Upright Qi is strong.
Night sweating is quite different in so far as Western patients
are more aware of this symptom; in particular, in menopausal
women this is a major symptom that is definitely reported by the
patient. Night sweating is clinically significant to clinch the
diagnosis of 
Yin deficiency (although it should be remembered
that other patterns may cause night sweating, e.g. Damp-Heat,
Stomach-Heat, etc.).
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I ask about daytime sweating mostly to confirm a diagnosis of
Lung-Qi deficiency and about night sweating to confirm a
diagnosis of Yin deficiency. If night-time sweating appears without
any manifestation of Yin deficiency, then we need to think again
and check whether this symptom is being caused by Damp-Heat or
other less common patterns.
857
HOW
 
WE ASK
When asking about daytime sweating, I generally ask, ‘Do you
tend to sweat abnormally even in the absence of exercise?’ In the
case of night-time sweating, the question is easier and I simply
ask, ‘Do you tend to sweat at night sometimes?’ We should,
however, exclude night sweating that is simply caused by too
heavy a blanket and too hot a bedroom.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF
SWEATING
Evaluation of symptoms of sweating must be made by considering
if it is part of an exterior or interior pattern.
Exterior Patterns
In exterior patterns, spontaneous sweating indicates either
invasion of Wind-Cold with the prevalence of Wind, which is due
to a disharmony of Nutritive and Defensive Qi, or invasion of
Wind-Heat. In invasion of Wind-Cold with the prevalence of Wind,
the deficient Nutritive Qi fails to hold fluids in the space between
skin and muscles, the pores are open and the patient sweats
slightly. It is important to note that this is not a profuse,
spontaneous sweating and the patient may not be aware of it
unless we ask. In exterior patterns, slight sweating may also occur
during invasions of Wind-Heat, Wind-Dampness or Summer-Heat.
In the course of acute febrile diseases, when the pathogenic
factor penetrates into the Interior there is often profuse sweating,
such as at the Bright-Yang stage of the Six Stages or the Qi level of
the Four Levels.
Interior Patterns
In interior patterns, spontaneous sweating is due to Qi or Yang
deficiency, or to Full-Heat if it occurs in daytime and to Yin
deficiency or Damp-Heat if it occurs at night. In Qi or Yang
deficiency it is usually a deficiency of Lungs or Heart; in Full-Heat
858
it is usually Heat (or Damp-Heat) in the Heart, Liver, Lungs or
Stomach.
 
Night sweating is 
not
 
always due to Yin deficiency.
Box 41.1
 
summarizes the patterns causing sweating in interior
conditions.
 
BOX 41.1
 
   
 
SWEATING IN INTERIOR
CONDITIONS
Daytime sweating
• 
 
Qi deficiency (of Lungs/Heart)
• 
 
Yang deficiency (of Lungs, Heart or Kidneys)
• 
 
Collapse of Yang or Yin
• 
 
Liver-Fire
• 
 
Heart-Fire
• 
 
Lung-Heat
• 
 
Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Heart
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach
Night sweating
• 
 
Yin deficiency (of any organ)
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Heart
PATHOLOGY OF SWEATING
Daytime sweating involves loss of fluids from the space between
skin and muscles where the Defensive Qi circulates; sweating at
night (called 
Dao Han
 
in Chinese, which literally means ‘thief
859
sweating’) involves loss of fluids from the bone level and is often
called ‘steaming from the bones’. Therefore the fluids lost during
night sweating are more precious than those lost during 
daytime
sweating: the fluids lost during daytime sweating are simply Body
Fluids (
Jin-Ye
 
), whereas those lost during night sweating are
nutritive Yin Essences. However, both daytime and night-time
sweating start a pathological vicious circle because they can derive
from a deficiency but also aggravate that deficiency. In fact,
daytime sweating injures Qi (the pores are called ‘Qi holes’) while
night sweating injures Yin.
Old Chinese books say that night-time sweat tastes sweet
(because it is a Yin Essence), while sweat lost in daytime tastes
salty.
Besides daytime and night-time sweating, there are two other
types of sweating: sweating from collapse (
Jue Han
 
); and shiver
sweating (
Zhan Han
 
).
Sweating from collapse occurs during collapse of Yang or
collapse of Yin: the sweat from collapse of Yin is oily, whereas that
from collapse of Yang pours out in watery and dilute drops.
Shiver sweating is seen usually in acute, febrile diseases and is
characterized by a bout of shivering followed by sweating. If the
fever abates after sweating, and the pulse is quiet and the body
feels cold to the touch, this means that the pathogenic factor has
been expelled and the Upright Qi has prevailed; but if after
sweating there is restlessness and the pulse is Rapid it indicates
that the pathogenic factor has prevailed and the Upright Qi has
been severely weakened.
CLASSIFICATION OF SWEATING
Observation,
 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 76
 
.
One must distinguish sweating according to the area of body,
time of day, conditions and quality of sweat.
Area Of Body
The significance of body areas may be summarized as:
 
• 
 
only on head: Heat or Damp-Heat in the Stomach,
860
Heat in the Upper Burner, deficient Yang floating
upwards, retention of food
• 
 
only on hands and feet: deficiency of Qi or Yin of the
Lungs or Heart and Kidneys; it could also be due to
Heat in the Lungs or Heart and Kidneys
• 
 
oily sweat on forehead: collapse of Yin
• 
 
only on nose: Damp-Heat in the Lungs or Stomach, or
both
• 
 
only on arms and legs: Stomach and Spleen deficiency
• 
 
only on hands: deficiency of Qi or Yin of the Lungs or
Heart, or Heat in the Lungs or Heart
• 
 
whole body: Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
on palms, soles and chest: Yin deficiency (called five-
palm sweat).
Time Of Day
The significance of time of day may be summarized as:
 
• 
 
in daytime: Yang deficiency
• 
 
at night-time: Yin deficiency (in some cases it can also
be from Damp-Heat).
Condition Of Illness
The conditions of illness are:
 
• 
 
profuse cold sweat during a severe illness: collapse of
Yang
• 
 
oily sweat on forehead, like pearls, not flowing:
collapse of Yang, danger of imminent death.
Quality Of Sweat
861
The different qualities of sweat are:
 
• 
 
oily: severe Yang deficiency
• 
 
yellow: Damp-Heat.
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 76
Absence of sweating is also a symptom in Chinese medicine. In
exterior invasions of Wind, it is always important to ask about
sweating: the absence of sweating indicates invasion of Wind-Cold
with the prevalence of Cold and this corresponds to the Greater-
Yang stage within the Six Stages identification of patterns. The
Greater-Yang stage is always caused by the invasion of Wind-Cold,
of which there are two types: one with the prevalence of Cold (in
which there is no sweating), the other with the prevalence of Wind
(in which there is sweating).
In other exterior conditions, absence of sweating usually
indicates Cold or Cold-Dampness in the superficial layers of the
body (the space between skin and muscles).
In interior conditions, absence of sweating indicates a ‘tight’ and
excessively closed state of the space between the skin and muscles
(
Cou Li
 
). This renders the person more prone to fever when
invaded by a pathogenic factor and it also indicates that the person
is more prone to Full than Empty conditions.
For a more detailed description of various types of sweating, see
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 76
 
.
862
CHAPTER 42
 
EARS AND EYES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
EARS
Tinnitus
Deafness
Earache
Itchy ears
EYES
Eye pain
Itchy eyes
Feeling of distension of the eyes
Streaming eyes
Dry eyes
Blurred vision
EARS
The ears are the orifices of the Kidneys and for this reason tinnitus
and deafness are often due to a Kidney deficiency. However, the
863
ears are also influenced by many other organs including the Liver,
Heart, Lungs and Gall-Bladder. In addition, although the Spleen is
not directly related to the ears, Dampness or Phlegm (deriving
from Spleen-Qi deficiency) may also affect the ears.
WHY
 
WE ASK
I generally ask about any ear symptoms under three main
circumstances: when there is a Kidney deficiency, Liver-Yang rising
or Phlegm. In the last of these, Phlegm obstructs the orifices and
may cause tinnitus or deafness.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I usually ask about any ear symptoms towards the end of the
consultation, primarily to confirm a pattern of Kidney deficiency,
Liver-Yang rising or Phlegm.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When asking about tinnitus it is important to express this
symptom in terms patients can understand. I generally ask them
whether they experience any ‘ringing in the ears’. It is important to
let the patient understand that even an occasional ringing in the
ears has clinical significance.
In general terms, the ears may be affected by a pathology of
Deficiency (usually of the Kidneys but also of Lung and Heart)
causing tinnitus, hardness of hearing or deafness, or by one of
Fullness, usually due to Heat or Phlegm.
The main deficiency patterns affecting the ear are:
 
• 
 
Kidney deficiency (or Yin or Yang) causing tinnitus or
deafness, or both
• 
 
Lung-Qi deficiency causing tinnitus
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency causing tinnitus.
864
The main Full patterns affecting the ears are:
 
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising causing tinnitus and deafness
• 
 
Liver-Fire causing tinnitus and deafness
• 
 
Phlegm in the head causing tinnitus
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder causing earache.
Tinnitus
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
Tinnitus is caused either by a failure of Qi to rise to the ears
(Empty type) or by an excess of Qi in the ears (Full type). In order
to differentiate between the Empty types and the Full types, we
need to consider the onset, the pitch, the duration and the reaction
to pressure of the tinnitus.
A sudden onset suggests a Full condition, which may be internal
such as Liver-Fire or Liver-Wind, or external such as Heat in the
Lesser Yang. A gradual onset suggests an Empty condition, which
may be due to a deficiency of the Kidneys, Lung or Heart.
A loud, high-pitched, ringing noise like a whistle indicates Liver-
Yang rising, Liver-Fire or Liver-Wind, whereas a low-pitched noise
like rushing water indicates a Kidney deficiency.
Tinnitus of short duration is usually due to an external invasion
of Wind-Heat affecting the Lesser Yang channels. Chronic tinnitus
of long duration is due to either a Kidney deficiency or a Liver
pathology (Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire, or Liver-Wind).
If the tinnitus is aggravated by pressing one’s hands on the ears,
this suggests a Full condition; if it is alleviated it suggests an
Empty condition.
Case history 42.1
 
illustrates a pattern of tinnitus caused by Yin
deficiency.
 
Case History 42.1
A 56-year-old woman had been suffering from tinnitus
for 3 years. The onset had been slow and gradual and
the ear noise was low in pitch. She also suffered from
poor memory, lack of concentration, blurred vision,
dizziness and hot flushes (flashes). On asking her, it
865
transpired that she also experience a dry mouth, anxiety
and palpitations. Her urine was dark. She also said that
she startled easily.
She also experienced occasionally a dull ache in the
chest, with the pain sensation extending up to the neck
like a ‘steel band’.
Her periods had stopped 2 years previously. Her
tongue was Red, with a redder tip, entirely without
coating and dry. Her pulse was Weak on both Rear
positions and very slightly Wiry but Fine on the left.
Diagnosis:
This patient presents with very clear manifestations of
Kidney-Yin deficiency (dark urine, tinnitus, dizziness,
blurred vision, hot flushes) and Heart-Yin deficiency
(poor memory and concentration, palpitations, anxiety
and propensity to be startled). The condition of Yin
deficiency is shown very clearly by the absence of
coating, and the redness of the tongue (combined with
the lack of coating) clearly indicates Empty-Heat. I
interpreted the dull ache in the chest extending to the
neck as a symptom of rebellious Qi of the Penetrating
Vessel, a common complicating factor in menopausal
problems. The Wiry quality of the pulse on the left
supports this diagnosis.
Box 42.1
 
summarizes the patterns underlying tinnitus.
 
BOX 42.1
 
   
 
TINNITUS
• 
 
Lesser-Yang Heat pattern: tinnitus of sudden onset
and alternation of chills and fever
• 
 
Liver-Fire or Liver-Yang rising: tinnitus of sudden
onset with headache
• 
 
Liver-Fire, Liver-Wind or Liver-Yang rising: high-
pitched tinnitus
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: low-pitched tinnitus
• 
 
Liver-Fire, Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Wind: chronic,
866
severe tinnitus
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: chronic, mild, intermittent tinnitus
• 
 
Deficiency of Heart- and Lung-Qi: chronic, mild,
intermittent tinnitus with palpitations and weak voice
Deafness
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
The diagnostic criteria of deafness or hardness of hearing are
similar to those of tinnitus: an acute onset points to Fullness,
whereas a gradual onset points to Deficiency. The main Excess
causes of deafness or hardness of hearing are Liver-Fire, Liver-
Yang rising and Phlegm-Fire affecting the Liver channel.
The main Empty cause of deafness or hardness of hearing is a
Kidney deficiency (the most common cause in the elderly).
However, the Kidneys are not the only organ that influences the
ears; hardness of hearing may also be caused by Heart-Blood,
Heart-Yin, Lung- or Heart-Qi deficiency, or deficiency of the
Gathering Qi (
Zong-Qi
 
) or Yang-Qi. In all these cases, hardness of
hearing is due to Qi or Blood not flowing upwards to the ears.
Box 42.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying deafness.
 
BOX 42.2
 
   
 
DEAFNESS
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: dizziness, tinnitus, backache
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: dizziness, tinnitus, headache
• 
 
Liver-Fire: tinnitus, thirst, bitter taste
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire in the Liver channel: dizziness, tinnitus,
sputum in throat, headache
• 
 
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: dizziness,
palpitations, insomnia
• 
 
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency: palpitation, shortness
of breath, weak voice
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: palpitations, poor memory,
insomnia
867
Earache
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
With the exception of Qi and Blood stagnation, earache is
usually due to Heat; this can be an invasion of Wind-Heat affecting
the Lesser-Yang channels (which is very common in children, and
accompanied by aversion to cold and fever), Damp-Heat in the
Liver and Gall-Bladder channel or Liver-Fire. A yellow discharge
from the ear may accompany an invasion of Wind-Heat or Damp-
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder. Earache from Liver-Fire is
accompanied by headache, a red face and a bitter taste in the
mouth. The chronic earache from Qi and Blood stagnation is not
common and is usually seen only in the elderly.
Box 42.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying earache.
 
BOX 42.3
 
   
 
EARACHE
• 
 
Wind-Heat in Lesser Yang channels: aversion to cold,
fever, yellow discharge
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Gall-Bladder: ear discharge
• 
 
Liver-Fire: headache, red face, bitter taste in mouth
• 
 
Qi and Blood stagnation: chronic earache (in the
elderly)
Itchy Ears
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 57
In acute cases, itchiness in the ears is due to invasion of Wind-
Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels. In chronic cases, it is due either
to Blood deficiency leading to internal Wind or to Kidney-Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Box 42.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying itchy ears.
 
BOX 42.4
 
   
 
ITCHY EARS
• 
 
Wind-Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels: acute
• 
 
Blood deficiency leading to Wind: chronic
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: chronic
868
EYES
The eyes are the orifice of the Liver, but this does not mean that all
eye problems are related to the Liver. In fact, other organs affect
the eyes and notable among these are the Heart, Kidneys and Gall-
Bladder.
The Heart influences the eyes as both its Main and Connecting
channels go to the eyeballs (see 
Fig 6.1 on p. 77
 
). For this reason,
many eye problems are due to Heart-Heat deriving from emotional
problems.
The Kidneys nourish and moisten the eyes in a similar way to
the Liver, and eye problems in the elderly are very frequently due
to a Kidney deficiency.
The Gall-Bladder channel also goes through the eyes and it may
cause eye problems, usually in conjunction with Liver-Fire or
Liver-Yang rising.
WHY
 
WE ASK
The questions regarding the eyes are somewhat more important
than those regarding the ears, first because 
eye problems are more
common and secondly because some eye symptoms often clinch a
diagnosis. For example, the symptom of dry eyes often clinches the
diagnosis of Liver-Yin deficiency (although it may also be caused
by Kidney-Yin deficiency).
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I ask about eye symptoms early during the interrogation in
conjunction with questions aimed at identifying a particular
pattern. For example, if a patient displays symptoms of Liver-
Blood deficiency, I would ask about blurred vision and floaters
immediately; I would then ask about dry eyes to find out whether
the Liver-Blood deficiency has progressed to a deeper level of
Liver-Yin deficiency.
Questions regarding blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes and
red/painful/itchy eyes are important and I ask them in nearly every
case.
869
HOW
 
WE ASK
‘Blurred vision’ is not an expression most patients are familiar
with. I generally ask them whether their vision is sometimes ‘not
clear or somewhat obfuscated’, stressing that the condition at
issue is quite apart from their being short sighted or not. ‘Floaters’
is another expression most patients are not familiar with and I
generally ask whether they ever see ‘black or white spots floating
in the field of vision’.
Eye Pain
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
Full or Empty character of eye pain
Table 42.1
 
and 
Figure 42.1
 
summarize the Full and Empty
characteristics of eye pain.
Table 42.1
Full and Empty characteristics of eye pain
 
Full/Yang
Empty/Yin
Onset
Sudden
Gradual
Time
Day
Night
Time of day
Morning
Afternoon
Constancy
Chronic and persistent
Chronic on and off
Swelling
With swelling
Without swelling
Intensity
Severe, unbearable
Dull, mild
Inflammation
Inflamed, red and hot
Not red, not hot
Pressure
Worse with pressure
Better with pressure
Temperature
Worse with heat, better
with cold
Worse with cold, better with heat
Irritability
Pain with irritability (Liver)
Pain without irritability (Yang
deficiency)
Character of pain
Pain like needles
Mild pain
Food
Worse after eating
Better after eating, worse when
hungry
Two excretions (urination and
defecation)
Redness, excretions
affected
No redness, excretions not
affected
Eyeball movement
With moving eyeballs
Eyeballs not moving
870
FIG. 42.1
 
Differentiation of eye pain
Radiation of pain
Eye pain should also be differentiated according to its radiation. If
the pain radiates to the occiput, the Greater-Yang channels are
affected; if it radiates to the sides of the head and the outer corners
of the eyes, the Lesser-Yang channels are affected; if it radiates to
the nose and teeth, the Bright-Yang channels are affected; if it
radiates to the top of the head, the Liver channel is affected.
Eye pain of internal or external origin
Eye pain can first be differentiated into internal and external types
(
Fig 42.1
 
); secondly internal eye pain can be differentiated into
Full and Empty as indicated in 
Table 42.1
 
.
Eye pain of external origin is mostly due to invasion of Wind-
Heat and is characterized by a sudden onset, sticky eyelids and
streaming eyes, with an aversion to cold and a fever.
Eye pain from a Full condition is often accompanied by swelling
and redness.
Box 42.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying eye pain.
 
BOX 42.5
 
   
 
EYE PAIN
871
Full
• 
 
Wind-Heat: acute onset, sticky and streaming eyes,
aversion to cold, fever
• 
 
Liver-Fire: red eyes, thirst, bitter taste, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: headache, eye distension
• 
 
Heart-Fire: red eyes, palpitations, anxiety
• 
 
Liver-Wind: vertigo
• 
 
Damp-Heat: sticky eyelids, sticky yellow tongue
coating
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat: sticky eyelids, feeling of oppression of
the chest, dizziness
• 
 
Blood stasis: bulging eyes, dark complexion, Purple
tongue
Empty
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: dizziness, blurred vision
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: insomnia, poor memory,
palpitations
• 
 
Kidney deficiency: dizziness, tinnitus
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi and Yin: slightly hot and painful
eyes, mild pain, desire to shut eyes, red eyes, tiredness,
dry eyes
Itchy Eyes
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
Excluding invasions of external Wind, itchy eyes are usually
caused either by Liver-Fire or by a deficiency of Liver-Blood giving
rise to Liver-Wind. Itchy eyes in allergic rhinitis are a separate
pathology which is not Liver-related, but is related to external
Wind as the reaction caused by the invasion of allergens mimics
that of invasion of external Wind.
Box 42.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying itchy eyes.
 
BOX 42.6
 
   
 
ITCHY EYES
• 
 
Liver-Fire: intensely itchy and red eyes
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency leading to Wind: intense
872
itchiness and tic of the face
• 
 
External Wind: acute
Feeling Of Distension Of The Eyes
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
A feeling of distension of the eyes is often associated with
emotional problems affecting the Liver, causing Liver-Qi
stagnation and Liver-Fire.
Streaming Eyes
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 61
Streaming eyes may be due to Heat of the Full or Empty type. In
particular, it may be due to Full-or Empty-Heat of the Lung or
Stomach.
Other causes of streaming eyes include external Wind-Heat,
Liver-Fire and Liver-Blood deficiency associated with Liver-Heat.
In some cases, streaming eyes may be due to Liver-Blood
deficiency and general Qi deficiency or to Kidney-Yang deficiency:
these two types of streaming eyes are called ‘cold streaming’.
Box 42.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying streaming eyes.
 
BOX 42.7
 
   
 
STREAMING EYES
• 
 
Lung-Heat: cough
• 
 
Lung Empty-Heat: dry cough
• 
 
Stomach-Heat: epigastric pain, thirst
• 
 
Stomach Empty-Heat: epigastric pain, thirst with
desire to sip
• 
 
External Wind-Heat: aversion to cold, fever
• 
 
Liver-Fire: red eyes, bitter taste
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency with some Heat: blurred
vision, red eyes
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: blurred vision
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: backache, abundant clear
urine
• 
 
General Qi deficiency: tiredness, loose stools, weak
873
voice
Dry Eyes
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
The most common causes of dry eyes are severe Liver-Blood
deficiency or Liver-Yin deficiency. In the elderly, dry eyes are often
due to Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency; in some cases Lung-Yin
deficiency is also involved. Dry eyes with acute onset may be due
to invasion of Wind-Heat, in which case they would also be red.
Box 42.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying dry eyes.
 
BOX 42.8
 
   
 
DRY EYES
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency: blurred vision
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency: dizziness, tinnitus
• 
 
Lung-Yin deficiency: dry cough
• 
 
External Wind-Heat: acute onset, red eyes, aversion to
cold, fever
Blurred Vision
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 61
‘Blurred vision’, called 
Mu Xuan
 
in Chinese, indicates not only
blurring of vision and floaters but also includes a slight dizziness.
Although blurred vision is a relatively common complaint, when
asked whether they suffer from it most patients will either answer
negatively or not know what we mean. Thus, this question should
be asked in a different way, such as ‘Do you have any problems
with your vision?’ or ‘Is your vision sometimes unclear?’
First of all, it should be remembered that the eyes are under the
control not only of the Liver but also of the Gall-Bladder and
Kidneys; especially in the elderly, a Kidney deficiency is often at
the root of eye problems and blurred vision.
Among the Deficiency types, the most common causes of
blurred vision are Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency. If blurred
874
vision is associated with dryness of the eyes, this suggests either
Liver-Yin deficiency or Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency, which is
common in the elderly.
Blurred vision may also be due to Excess patterns such as Gall-
Bladder Heat, Liver-Yang rising (a common feature in migraine),
Liver-Fire and Phlegm. Phlegm, in particular, is not often
recognized as a possible cause of blurred vision; however, it may
cause a blurring of vision with muzziness and dizziness because it
obstructs the clear orifices of the head, including the eyes (for the
same reason, Phlegm may cause tinnitus).
Box 42.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying blurred vision.
 
BOX 42.9
 
   
 
BLURRED VISION
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: floaters, dizziness
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency: dry eyes
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: dizziness, tinnitus
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Heat: eye pain, red eyes
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: headache
• 
 
Liver-Fire: red, painful eyes
• 
 
Phlegm: dizziness, muzziness
875
CHAPTER 43
 
FEELING OF
COLD, FEELING OF
HEAT AND FEVER
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
FEELING OF COLD
Feeling of cold in interior conditions
Feeling of cold in exterior conditions
How to distinguish between external and
internal causes of feeling of cold
SIMULTANEOUS FEELING OF COLD AND FEVER IN EXTERIOR
CONDITIONS
Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat
Summer-Heat
Damp-Heat
Dry-Heat
ALTERNATING FEELING OF COLD AND FEELING OF HEAT
876
FEELING OF HEAT FROM INTERNAL CAUSES
INTERIOR FEVER
Acute fever
Chronic fever
FIVE-PALM HEAT
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT IN
INTERNAL CONDITIONS
Simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and
Kidney-Yang
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat
Disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel
Yin Fire
INTRODUCTION
Questions about feeling of cold or heat and fever are generally
asked towards the end of the interrogation to establish the Hot or
Cold nature of a pattern.
WHY
 
WE ASK
We should always ask all our patients about feelings of cold or
heat; the clinical significance, however, varies in internal and
external conditions. In internal conditions (which constitute the
overwhelming majority of most practices) the distinction between
feelings of cold and feelings of heat simply tells us about the Cold
or Hot nature of the prevailing pattern.
In external conditions (e.g. when a patient presents with an
acute cold or influenza) questions about feelings of cold or heat
are needed primarily to establish, first of all, whether it is indeed
an external condition and whether the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior or Interior.
The patient’s cold or hot feeling should never be discounted,
877
even when it contradicts the tongue or pulse, or both. For example,
a patient may have a clearly Red tongue but always feel cold:
although the sign of a Red tongue is very important, we should not
discount the cold feeling and should investigate further to find the
cause of this discrepancy.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
As mentioned above, questions about feelings of cold and heat
should always be asked routinely in all patients.
In 
internal conditions
 
, questions about a patient’s feeling cold
or hot are often asked towards the end of the consultation to
confirm the existence of a Cold or Hot pattern. Often questions
about feelings of cold or heat also help us to detect the
constitutional tendency of a patient to Cold or Hot conditions. For
example, patients may not have significant symptoms of Yang
deficiency and Cold but, on asking, may say that they always feel
cold, need to wear more clothes than other people, etc.; this
symptom should never be discounted because it indicates an
underlying tendency to Yang deficiency and Cold patterns.
In 
external conditions
 
, questions about feelings of cold and heat
are crucial and should always be asked in detail to establish
whether the pathogenic factor has gone into the Interior or
whether it is still on the Exterior. If we see a patient every day in
the course of an acute, exterior condition, as we should, we should
carefully ask about feelings of cold and heat every day to establish
the exterior or interior nature of the pattern.
HOW
 
WE ASK
In China, the questions about feeling of cold and feeling of heat
coincide almost exactly with the terminology of Chinese medicine,
which makes it very easy for Chinese doctors. With Western
patients, it is a little more difficult and we need to make sure that
we ask patients about feelings of cold and heat in a way that they
can readily understand.
In interior conditions, for feelings of cold we should simply ask,
‘Do you feel cold in general?’, ‘Do you have a tendency to feel
878
cold?’ or ‘Do you notice that you feel colder than other people?’.
For feelings of heat we should ask questions such as, ‘Would you
say you feel hot in general?’, ‘Do you sometimes feel unusually
hot?’ or ‘Do you want to open the window when everyone else
wants it closed?’ If patients answer affirmatively to one of the
above questions about feelings of heat, then we should go on to
ask more specifically about when they tend to feel hot in order to
establish whether it is Full- or Empty-Heat. We therefore ask
questions such as ‘Do you tend to feel hotter in the afternoon or
evening?’
Terminology
Before discussing the various causes of feeling cold, or feeling of
hot and feverish, I would like to clarify somepoints regarding
terminology, particularly with regard to fever.
The 
cause
 
of disease in feeling of cold, feeling of heat or fever
may be 
external
 
(e.g. external Wind) or 
internal
 
; thus, the cause of
disease simply refers to the origin of the pathogenic factor.
The 
pattern
 
(or 
syndrome
 
) refers to the location of the pathogenic
factor, which may be on the 
Interior
 
or 
Exterior
 
: this is decided 
not
according to the origin of the pathogenic factor but on the basis of
the clinical manifestations. In other words, an external cause of
disease (e.g. external Wind) may cause both an exterior pattern
and an interior pattern (
Fig 43.1
 
).
FIG. 43.1
 
Relationship between external and internal causes of
disease with exterior and interior patterns
An external cause of disease is, for example, external Wind: this
causes initially an exterior pattern; if the pathogenic factor is not
expelled, however, it goes on to cause an interior pattern. An
879
internal cause of disease (such as Liver-Fire) causes an interior
pattern by definition.
With regard to fever, we should not confuse a fever from an
external cause with an exterior fever: an external cause may cause
an exterior fever initially and later, if the pathogenic factor is not
expelled, it will cause an interior fever.
FEELING OF COLD
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 82
There are four different degrees of ‘cold feeling’ which apply
both to interior and exterior conditions. In ascending order of
severity with their clinical significance these are:
 
• 
 
‘aversion to wind’ (
Wu Feng
 
, literally ‘loathing or
disliking wind’)
• 
 
‘fear of cold’ (
Wei Han
 
)
• 
 
‘aversion to cold’ (
Wu Han
 
, literally ‘loathing or
disliking cold’)
• 
 
‘shivers’ (
Han Zhan
 
).
Aversion to wind
 
means that the patient has goose pimples,
dislikes going out in the wind and wants to stay indoors.
Fear of cold
 
means that the patient feels quite cold, wants to stay
indoors and close to a source of heat, and wants to cover up.
Aversion to cold
 
means that the patient feels very cold, wants to
stay indoors and likes to wrap up in bed with many blankets.
Shivers
 
means that the patient feels extremely cold, shivers and
wants to be covered up in bed under a heap of blankets.
The symptoms of feeling cold should be clearly differentiated
between interior and exterior patterns.
Feeling Of Cold In Interior Conditions
In internal diseases, questions about feeling cold serve to establish
the Cold nature of the presenting patterns. Cold may be Full or
Empty. Whether it is Full or Empty, it always manifests with a
880
feeling of cold.
If a person feels easily cold and experiences cold limbs, this
clearly indicates either Full-Cold or Empty- Cold deriving from
Yang deficiency. In patients with chronic diseases, Empty-Cold is
more common than Full-Cold.
Full-Cold is characterized by an intense feeling of cold and
shivers; the body also feels cold to the touch. Various parts of the
body may feel particularly cold depending on the location of the
Cold: if it is in the Stomach the limbs and epigastrium will feel
cold, if in the Intestines the legs and lower abdomen are cold, if in
the Uterus the lower abdomen feels cold. Full-Cold has usually a
sudden onset and may last only a few months at the most because
Cold will inevitably injure Yang and lead to Yang deficiency and
therefore Empty-Cold.
Box 43.1
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of Full-Cold.
 
BOX 43.1
 
   
 
CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF FULL-COLD
• 
 
Intense feeling of cold and shivers
• 
 
Body feels noticeably cold and relatively hard to touch
• 
 
Pain
• 
 
Full pulse
• 
 
Sudden onset
Yang deficiency of any organ may cause a cold feeling or cold
limbs, or both. It could be due especiallyto a deficiency of Yang of
the Heart, Lungs, Spleen, Kidneys and Stomach. The cold feeling is
both subjective and objective, that is, the patient feels easily and
frequently cold and the limbs or other parts of the body will feel
cold to the touch.
A deficiency of Yang of the Lungs or Heart, or both, will
manifest especially with cold hands (
Fig 43.2
 
), a deficiency of
Spleen-Yang with cold limbs and abdomen (
Fig 43.3
 
) and that of
Kidney-Yang especially with cold legs, knees, feet and back (
Fig
43.4
 
). A deficiency of Stomach-Yang will manifest with cold
epigastrium and cold limbs in a similar way to Spleen-Yang
881
deficiency (
Fig 43.3
 
).
FIG. 43.2
 
Lung- and Heart-Yang deficiency
882
FIG. 43.3
 
Spleen-Yang deficiency
883
FIG. 43.4
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Box 43.2
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of Empty-Cold.
 
BOX 43.2
 
   
 
CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF EMPTY-COLD
• 
 
Mild, persistent cold feeling or tendency to feeling
cold
• 
 
Body feels mildly cold to touch
• 
 
No pain
• 
 
Weak pulse
• 
 
Slow, gradual onset
There are however, other causes of cold limbs (as opposed to a
general cold feeling). One is Qi stagnation: when Qi stagnates it
may fail to reach the hands and feet and these become cold (
Fig
884
43.5
 
). This is called the ‘Four Rebellious Syndrome’, in which the
‘Four Rebellious’ indicate cold hands and feet; the famous formula
Si Ni San 
Four Rebellious Powder
 
is used for this pattern. An
important difference between cold in the 
limbs due to Yang
deficiency and that due to Qi stagnation is that in the former case
the whole limb will be cold whereas in the latter case only the
hands and feet, and especially the fingers, are cold.
FIG. 43.5
 
Cold hands and feet from Qi stagnation
Besides this, cold limbs may also derive in women from Blood
deficiency; this is due to the deficient Blood not reaching the
extremities. In cases of Heart-Blood deficiency only the hands and
chest will be cold (
Fig 43.6
 
), whereas in cases of Liver-Blood
deficiency the feet will be cold (
Fig 43.7
 
).
885
FIG. 43.6
 
Heart-Blood deficiency
886
FIG. 43.7
 
Liver-Blood deficiency
We should bear in mind that, even if patients feel cold in
general, they may have a feeling of heat in a specific part of their
body, (e.g the face) and we should therefore always remember to
ask about specific parts of the body after we have asked about the
generalfeeling. A very common example of this, especially in
women, is a general cold feeling with occasional episodes of
feeling hot in the face.
 
When patients feels cold in general, remember to ask
then whether they feel hot in any particular part of the
body.
Box 43.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying a cold feeling and
cold limbs in interior conditions.
887
 
BOX 43.3
 
   
 
FEELING OF COLD IN
INTERIOR CONDITIONS
• 
 
Yang Deficiency of Heart/Lungs: cold hands, sweaty
hands
• 
 
Spleen-Yang/Stomach-Yang deficiency: cold limbs and
abdomen
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: cold legs, knees, feet, back
• 
 
Qi stagnation: cold hands and feet, and especially the
fingers
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: cold hands and chest
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: cold feet
Feeling Of Cold In Exterior Conditions
External invasions
In external invasions, a feeling of cold or shivers serves to establish
whether the pathogenic factor is in the Exterior or in the Interior.
In fact, when the pathogenic factor is on the Exterior, the patient
feels cold, shivers and dislikes the idea of going out (often referred
to as ‘aversion to cold’). The cold feeling may or may not be
accompanied by an actual fever, but it will be associated with heat
in the skin, that is, the patient feels cold and shivers but his or her
skin feels hot to the touch.
The areas that are usually touched to gauge this are the dorsum
of the hands and the forehead. It should be stressed that the
feeling of cold and fever (or body feeling hot to the touch) are
simultaneous
 
and not alternating: thus, if a patient feels cold in the
morning without a fever and without body feeling hot to the touch
and has a fever in the evening, this would correspond to the
Lesser-Yang syndrome and would 
not
 
constitute the beginning
stage of an invasion of Wind. 
Figure 43.8
 
differentiates the
manifestations of cold feeling in exterior and interior conditions.
888
FIG. 43.8
 
Cold feeling in exterior and interior conditions
In exterior syndromes, the presence of a cold feeling and
shivering is a determining factor in diagnosing that the pathogenic
factor is still on the Exterior and that the pattern is therefore an
‘Exterior’ one. As soon as the cold feeling disappears and the
patient feels hot, this is a certain sign that the pathogenic factor is
in the Interior and it has transformed into Heat. One can see these
signs very clearly in small children: when the pathogenic factor is
on the Exterior, the child will tend to go to bed and cover himself
or herself with lots of blankets. As the pathogenic factor enters the
Interior (usually changing into Heat), the child throws the
blankets off.
Box 43.4
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of interior and
exterior pathogenic factors.
 
BOX 43.4
 
   
 
INTERIOR VERSUS
EXTERIOR PATHOGENIC FACTOR
• 
 
Pathogenic factor on the Exterior: feeling of cold,
shivers, dislike of going out, possibly a fever, patient is
hot to the touch (especially forehead and dorsum of the
hand)
• 
 
Pathogenic factor in the Interior: cold feeling
disappears, patient feels 
only
 
hot
Wind-Cold versus Wind-Heat
In exterior patterns, both Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat cause a cold
feeling and shivering; it is a common misconception that this is
not the case with Wind-Heat. Since the cold feeling is caused by
889
the obstruction of Defensive Qi by Wind (whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat) in the space between skin and muscles, the cold
feeling and shivering are present also in invasions of Wind-Heat,
albeit to a lesser degree than in Wind-Cold. This will be explained
in greater detail below.
How To Distinguish Between External And
Internal Causes Of Feeling Of Cold
The distinction between a cold feeling from an invasion of external
Wind and a cold feeling from internal Cold (which may be Full or
Empty) is fairly easy as the accompanying symptoms are quite
obvious. During an external invasion with the pathogenic factor
still on the Exterior, the patient feels cold, dislikes the idea of
going out, shivers, and may have a fever, and the dorsum of the
hand feels hot; in addition, there will be sneezing, a cough, a nasal
discharge, a sore throat, a headache, body aches and a Floating
pulse.
When the patient suffers from interior Cold, there are none of
the above symptoms. Another distinction between a cold feeling
in exterior syndromes and one in interior syndromes is that in the
former case the cold feeling is 
not
 
alleviated by covering oneself,
while in the latter case it is. In fact patients who feel cold and
shiver from an invasion of exterior Wind will want to go to bed and
cover up with blankets, but this will not alleviate the cold feeling
and shivering. If a patient suffers from internal Cold, this will be
alleviated by covering oneself. 
Table 43.1
 
summarizes the
differentiation between external and internal Cold.
Table 43.1
Differentiation between external and internal Cold
External invasion of Cold
Internal Cold
Feels cold, shivers, dislikes going out, fever,
sneezing, cough, sore throat, nasal discharge
Feels cold, none of the symptoms
associated with an external invasion is
present
Cold feeling 
not
 
alleviated by wrapping up in
clothes and blankets
Cold feeling 
is
 
alleviated by wrapping up
warm
890
Differentiation of pathology of a feeling of cold from
external or internal causes
The pathogenesis of a cold feeling in exterior patterns is different
from that in interior patterns. In exterior patterns, the cold feeling
is due to the fact that the external Wind obstructs the space
between skin and muscles where the Defensive Qi circulates; as
Defensive Qi warms the muscles, its obstruction by Wind causes
the patient to feel cold and shiver (even if the pathogenic factor is
Wind-Heat). Thus, Defensive Qi is not necessarily weak but only
obstructed in the space between skin and muscles.
In interior patterns, the cold feeling is usually due either to a
Yang deficiency and a failure of Yang Qi to warm the muscles and
limbs (in case of Empty-Cold) or to Cold obstructing the flow of
Yang Qi to the muscles and limbs (in case of Full-Cold).
SIMULTANEOUS FEELING OF COLD
AND FEVER IN EXTERIOR
CONDITIONS
First of all, we should define ‘fever’. ‘Fever’ does not indicate an
actual raised temperature (as measured by a thermometer) but an
objective emanation of heat from the patient’s body felt on
palpation (especially on the forehead and dorsum of hands). This
is discussed in more detail below.
A simultaneous feeling of cold and fever indicates the invasion
of an exterior pathogenic factor and that this factor is still on the
Exterior. The simultaneous presence of a cold feeling or shivers
with a fever, or both, usually indicates an acute invasion of Wind
and it denotes that the pathogenic factor is still on the Exterior: as
long as there is a feeling of cold the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior. The clinical situations when the pathogenic factor is on
the Exterior are described in the Greater-Yang pattern within the
Six Stages from the ‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang
Han Lun
 
) and the Defensive-Qi level within the Four Levels
described by the School of Warm Diseases (
Wen Bing
 
) of the Qing
dynasty (see 
Part 6
 
). As mentioned above, it is important to stress
891
that the feeling of cold and fever (or body feeling hot to the touch)
are simultaneous and not alternating (
Fig 43.9
 
).
FIG. 43.9
 
Simultaneous feeling of cold and fever
Although it is the simultaneous occurrence of cold feeling and
fever that defines an exterior pattern due to invasion of exterior
Wind, I shall discuss the pathology of cold feeling and fever in
more detail separately.
The aetiology and pathology of Wind-Heat can be used as a
blueprint to explain the aetiology and pathology of Summer-Heat,
Damp-Heat and Dry-Heat.
The pathogenic factors discussed are:
 
• 
 
Wind-Heat
• 
 
Wind-Cold
• 
 
Summer-Heat
• 
 
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Dry-Heat.
Before discussing the above pathogenic factors, we should first
discuss the pathology and clinical manifestation of ‘feeling of cold’
and ‘fever’.
Cold feeling (‘aversion to cold’) in exterior patterns
892
In exterior patterns, as explained above, the cold feeling is due to
the fact that the external Wind obstructs the space between the
skin and muscles (called 
Cou Li
 
) where the Defensive Qi
circulates; and Defensive Qi is not necessarily weak but only
obstructed
 
. Also, since the cold feeling is caused by the obstruction
of Defensive Qi by Wind (whether it is Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat)
in the space between the skin and muscles, the cold feeling and
shivering are present also in invasions of Wind-Heat, albeit to a
lesser degree than in Wind-Cold.
As mentioned above, there are four different degrees of ‘cold
feeling’ in Exterior conditions: ‘aversion to wind’, ‘fear of cold’,
‘aversion to cold’ and ‘shivers’. The clinical significance of these
four degrees of feeling of cold in the context of exterior invasions is
listed in 
Box 43.5
 
.
 
BOX 43.5
 
   
 
DEGREES OF FEELING COLD
• 
 
Aversion to wind
 
: the patient has goose pimples,
dislikes going out in the wind and wants to stay indoors
• 
 
Fear of cold
 
: the patient feels quite cold, wants to be
indoors near sources of heat and wants to cover up
• 
 
Aversion to cold
 
: the patient feels very cold and wants
to stay indoors but covering up or staying in bed under
blankets does not relieve the cold feeling
• 
 
Shivers
 
: the patient feels extremely cold and shivers
but covering up or staying in bed under blankets does
not relieve the cold feeling
Thus, generally speaking, there are three aspects to the ‘cold
feeling’ in invasions of exterior Wind: the 
patient feels cold, has
‘waves’ of shivers and is reluctant to go out and wants to stay
indoors near sources of heat. Except in mild cases, the cold feeling
is not relieved by covering oneself.
In conclusion, a feeling of cold in exterior invasions is due to the
obstruction of Defensive Qi in the space between skin and muscles
and it indicates that the pathogenic factor is on the Exterior; as
soon as the feeling of cold goes, the pathogenic factor is in the
893
Interior.
Fever in exterior patterns
As for ‘fever’ it is important to understand that the Chinese term
Fa Shao
 
does not necessarily indicate what we mean by fever.
‘Fever’ is a sign in modern Western medicine, not in old Chinese
medicine. In old China, there were obviously no thermometers
and the symptom 
Fa Shao
 
described in the old texts does not
necessarily mean that the patient has an actual fever. It literally
means ‘emitting burning heat’ and it indicates that the patient’s
body feels hot, in severe cases almost burning to the touch; the
areas touched are usually the forehead and especially the dorsum
of the hands (as opposed to the palms, which tend to reflect more
Empty-Heat).
In fact, it is a characteristic of 
Fa Shao
 
(so-called ‘fever’) in the
exterior stage of invasions of Wind that the dorsum of the hands
feels hot compared with the palms and the upper back feels hot
compared with the chest.
 
1
 
This objective hot feeling of the
patient’s body may or may not be accompanied by an actual fever.
Indeed, in fevers of internal origin, there may even be cases when
the patient has an actual low-grade fever and the body feels cold to
the touch.
Thus, it is important to remember that, in the context of exterior
conditions from invasions of Wind, ‘fever’ indicates the 
objective
hot feeling of the patient’s body (with or without an actual raised
body temperature) and 
not
 
a feeling of heat; in fact, as described
above, the patient feels cold.
 
‘Fever’ does not necessarily indicate a raised
temperature: it indicates that the patient’s forehead and
dorsum of hands feel hot to the touch. The patient may
or may not have an actual fever.
Simultaneous fever and feeling of cold
When the symptom of shivers and feeling cold occurs
simultaneously with the objective sign of the patient’s body feeling
894
hot to the touch (or having an actual fever), this indicates an acute
invasion of external Wind and it denotes that the pathogenic factor
is still on the Exterior. In particular, it is the symptoms of shivering
and feeling cold that indicate that the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior: the moment the patient does not feel cold any longer but
feels hot and, if in bed, throws off the blankets, this means that the
pathogenic factor is in the Interior and it has turned into Heat.
Pathology of fever
The fever, or hot feeling of the body in external invasions of Wind,
is due to the struggle between the body’s Qi (Upright Qi) and the
external pathogenic factor. Thus, the strength of the fever (or hot
feeling of the body) reflects the intensity of this struggle; this
depends on the relative strengths of the external pathogenic factor
and the Upright Qi. The stronger the external pathogenic factor,
the higher is the fever (or hot feeling of the body); likewise, the
stronger the Upright Qi, the higher is the fever (or hot feeling of
the body). Thus the fever will be highest when both the external
pathogenic factor and the Upright Qi are strong.
The relative strength of the pathogenic factor and the Upright Qi
is only one factor which determines the intensity of the fever (or
hot feeling of the body). Another is simply the constitution of a
person: a person with a Yang constitution (i.e. with predominance
of Yang) will be more prone to a higher fever (or hot feeling of the
body).
 
The intensity of fever in exterior conditions is related to
the struggle between the Upright Qi and the external
pathogenic factor and has nothing to do with whether
the pathogenic factor is Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat.
Degrees of fever
Thus, there are three possible degrees of fever (or hot feeling of
the body); the patterns underlying these are listed in 
Box 43.6
 
.
 
BOX 43.6
 
   
 
DEGREES OF EXTERIOR
FEVER
895
• 
 
Strong pathogenic factor and strong Upright Qi
 
: high
fever (or hot feeling of the body)
• 
 
Strong pathogenic factor with weak Upright Qi or
vice versa
 
: medium fever (or hot feeling of the body)
• 
 
Weak pathogenic factor and weak Upright Qi
 
: low
fever (or hot feeling of the body) or no fever
Wind-Cold And Wind-Heat
Factors determining the development of Wind-Cold or
Wind-Heat
The constitution of a person is the main factor which determines
whether a person who falls prey to an invasion of Wind develops
Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat. Were it not so, in cold northern
countries nobody should fall prey to invasions of Wind-Heat,
which is not the case. This is also the reason why, in children,
invasions of Wind-Heat are far more prevalent than Wind-Cold:
this is because children are naturally Yang in nature compared
with adults. There are, however, also new, artificial factors which
may predispose a person to invasions of Wind-Heat when
succumbing to Wind, such as living in very dry, centrally heated
places, working in hot conditions (e.g. cooks, metal workers), etc.
Clinical manifestations of Wind-Heat and Wind-Cold
Although a fever is more likely to occur in invasions of Wind-Heat,
the differentiation between Wind-Heat and Wind-Cold is not made
on the basis of the intensity of aversion to cold and fever (or a hot
feeling of the body). Other factors such as the tongue and other
symptoms help us to differentiate between Wind-Cold and Wind-
Heat. These are listed in 
Table 43.2
 
.
896
Table 43.2
Differentiation between Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat manifestations
Wind-Cold: differentiation between ‘Attack of Wind’
and ‘Attack of Cold’
So far we have talked about Wind-Cold in general but the
‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ differentiates between two
types of Wind-Cold invasions: one with prevalence of Wind, called
‘Attack of Wind’, and the other with prevalence of Cold, called
‘Attack of Cold’. The Attack of Wind is described in Clause 2 of the
‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’: 
‘The Greater-Yang pattern
with fever, sweating, aversion to wind and a Floating and Slowed-
down pulse is called Attack of Wind
 
’.
 
2
 
It may seem strange that
the pulse is Slowed-down in this pattern as Wind is a Yang
pathogenic factor that moves and opens. However, it is also true
that Wind may cause stiffness (as in occipital stiffness in Wind-
Cold invasions), rigidity and paralysis; thus it is quite 
possible for
the Attack of Wind of external Wind-Cold to cause a Slowed-down
pulse (which is less slow than the Slow pulse). The commentary to
Clause 2 confirms that 
Huan
 
in this case means a ‘moderate and
slow (
Chi
 
) pulse’.
 
3
Clause 3 describes the Attack of Cold: 
‘The Greater-Yang pattern
897
with fever or no fever, aversion to cold, body aches, retching and
Tight pulse on both Yin and Yang, is called Attack of Cold’
 
.
 
4
In Attack of Wind, the patient’s Nutritive Qi is more deficient
than in the Attack of Cold and this causes a slight sweating. Other
symptoms are tabulated in 
Table 43.3
 
.
Table 43.3
Differentiation between Attack of Cold and Attack of Wind in Wind
– Cold
Apart from Wind-Heat and Wind-Cold, simultaneous shivers
and fever may also occur with invasions of Summer-Heat, Damp-
Heat and Dry-Heat.
Summer-Heat
Summer-Heat is a type of Wind-Heat and therefore manifests with
a simultaneous feeling of cold and fever. The clinical
manifestations usually are: fever (or hot feeling of the body),
shivers, no sweating, headache, a feeling of heaviness, an
uncomfortable sensation in the epigastrium, irritability, thirst,
tongue Red in the front or sides with a sticky white coating, and a
Soggy and Rapid pulse.
The tongue coating is white because the pathogenic factor is on
the Exterior.
Damp-Heat
Damp-Heat from external origin also manifests with a
898
simultaneous feeling of cold and fever at its very beginning stages.
The clinical manifestations are usually fever that is worse in the
afternoon, body hot to touch, aversion to cold, shivers, swollen
glands, headache, a feeling of heaviness, a feeling of oppression of
the epigastrium, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, sticky
white tongue coating, and a Soggy-Slow pulse.
The pulse is Slow because of the obstructive influence of
Dampness. The tongue coating is white because the pathogenic
factor is on the Exterior.
Dry-Heat
Dry-Heat is a type of Wind-Heat and therefore manifests with a
simultaneous feeling of cold and fever. The clinical manifestations
usually are: fever, slight aversion to cold, shivers, slight sweating,
dry skin, nose, mouth and throat, dry cough, sore throat, Dry
tongue with thin white coating, and a Floating-Rapid pulse.
The tongue coating is white because the pathogenic factor is on
the Exterior.
ALTERNATING FEELING OF COLD
AND FEELING OF HEAT
An alternating feeling of cold and feeling of heat (or fever) should
not be confused with the 
simultaneous
 
feeling of cold and fever
which characterizes invasions of external Wind. There are two
main differences. First, in alternating feeling of cold and feeling of
heat, the feeling of heat is a subjective feeling of the patient,
whereas in the simultaneous aversion to cold and fever of external
invasions the feeling of heat is an objective feeling of heat on
palpation of the patient’s forehead and hands. Secondly, in
alternating feeling of cold and feeling of heat, the cold and hot
sensations alternate 
whereas in aversion to cold and fever, they are
simultaneous.
Alternating feeling of cold and feeling of heat occurs also in
external invasions, but only those affecting the Lesser-Yang
channels (whereas aversion to cold and fever occurs in external
899
patterns affecting the Greater-Yang channels). This symptom is a
chief symptom of the Lesser-Yang pattern within the Six Stages
(
Chapter 105
 
) or of the Gall-Bladder Heat pattern within the Four
Levels (
Chapter 104
 
). The latter is also a Lesser-Yang-type of
pattern but with the prevalence of heat rather than cold. This is
reflected in the patient’s sensations in that the feeling of heat is
predominant over the feeling of cold.
 
• 
 
‘Feeling of heat’ in alternating cold and hot feeling is
subjective.
• 
 
‘Feeling of heat’ (or fever) in simultaneous aversion to
cold and fever is objective, i.e. the patient’s body feels
hot to the touch.
Case history 43.1
 
illustrates a pattern causing alternating feeling
of heat and feeling of cold.
 
Case History 43.1
An 18-year-old girl complained of an acute illness
manifesting with alternation of shivers and feeling of
heat, swollen glands, sore throat, headache, lethargy
and a feeling of heaviness of the head. These symptoms
had started 3 weeks before the consultation. Her tongue
was Red with red points in the front with a thin yellow
coating. Her pulse was Floating in general, especially on
both Front positions and slightly Slippery on the right
side.
Diagnosis:
This is a very clear case of acute invasion of Wind-
Damp-Heat still at the exterior level at the time of
consultation. It is still at the exterior level because she
still experiences shivers. Together with the typical
symptoms of Wind-Heat, there is also acute, exterior
Dampness manifesting with swollen glands, a feeling of
heaviness of the head and the Slippery quality on the
right side of the pulse.
900
FEELING OF HEAT FROM INTERNAL
CAUSES
A subjective feeling of heat may be caused by Full-Heat or Empty-
Heat of any organ. In Full-Heat, the feeling of heat is somewhat
more intense than in Empty-Heat; another difference is that in
Empty-Heat, the feeling of heat tends to be more marked in the
afternoon or evening. Also, Empty-Heat is characterized by a
feeling of heat especially in the Yin areas of the body, and
particularly in the chest, palms and soles. Of course, the
differentiation between Full-Heat and Empty-Heat is done on the
basis of other manifestations such as thirst, complexion and most
of all the tongue, which will be Red with a coating in Full-Heat and
Red without coating in Empty-Heat. The main differentiating
manifestations of Full-Heat and Empty-Heat are shown in 
Box 43.7
.
 
BOX 43.7
 
   
 
DIFFERENTIATION
BETWEEN FULL-HEAT AND EMPTY-
HEAT
Full-Heat
• 
 
Usually a more intense heat
• 
 
Generalized over the body or in the face
• 
 
Not related to time of day
• 
 
Intense thirst
• 
 
Pronounced irritability
• 
 
Complexion red all over
• 
 
Red tongue with thick, dry yellow coating
• 
 
Overflowing-Rapid pulse
Empty-Heat
• 
 
Less intense heat
• 
 
Often on chest, soles and palms
• 
 
Worse in afternoon and evening
• 
 
Dry mouth with a desire to sip drinks
• 
 
Vague anxiety
• 
 
Redness on the cheekbones
901
• 
 
Red tongue without coating
• 
 
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
With Full-Heat, the organs that are most often involved are the
Liver, Heart, Stomach and Lungs; with Empty-Heat, the organs
that are most often involved are the Kidneys, Heart, Stomach and
Lungs.
We should bear in mind that, in some cases, a person may feel
hot in general but simultaneously experience cold feet, for
example. Therefore, when a patient replies 
affirmatively to the
question ‘Do you have a tendency to feel hot in general?’, our
questioning should not stop there; rather it should continue in
order to ascertain whether there is any cold feeling in any
particular parts of the body. For a discussion on the clinical
significance of simultaneous (and contradictory) hot and cold
feelings in internal conditions, see below.
 
When a patient feels hot in general, remember to ask
about any possible cold feeling in a particular part of
the body (and vice versa).
INTERIOR FEVER
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 82
By ‘fever’ is meant the situation when the patient has a fever but
no simultaneous cold feeling or shivers; thus, we are now
discussing interior fevers, which, it should be remembered, may
be of external or internal origin. An interior fever of external origin
is one caused by an exterior pathogenic factor (such as Wind-Heat,
Wind-Cold or Damp-Heat) which has penetrated into the Interior
and caused a fever; an interior fever of internal origin stems from
an internal disharmony such as interior Heat, Yin deficiency, Qi or
Blood deficiency and Blood stasis (
Figs 43.10
 
and 
43.11
 
).
902
FIG. 43.10
 
Relationship between external pathogenic factor and
interior fever
FIG. 43.11
 
External and internal causes of interior fevers
In some of the patterns discussed, there may not be an actual
fever but only a feeling of heat: the pathology and pathogenesis of
interior fever or feeling of heat is the same. Generally speaking,
acute fevers are characterized by an actual fever, (i.e. raised body
temperature), whereas chronic ‘fevers’ may be characterized
simply by a feeling of heat without a rise in body temperature.
Thus, contrary to the situation in exterior syndromes when ‘fever’
indicates an objective hot feeling of the body, in chronic interior
syndromes with fever of internal origin, ‘fever’ may indicate a
subjective feeling of heat.
There are three degrees of interior fever (or hot body sensation);
these are listed in 
Box 43.8
 
.
 
BOX 43.8
 
   
 
DEGREES OF INTERIOR
FEVER
• 
 
Slight fever
 
(
Wei Re
 
): the fever is very low and the
body is only slightly hot: the patient may not be aware
of having a fever
• 
 
Fever
 
(
Fa Re
 
): the body temperature is raised (or the
body feels quite hot to the touch): the patient is aware of
the fever and has a feeling of heat
• 
 
Strong fever
 
(
Zhuang Re
 
): the fever is very high, the
903
body is very hot to the touch, the patient has an intense
feeling of heat and throws off bedclothes
Acute Fever
When discussing fevers of internal origin, it is important to
differentiate between acute and chronic fever. Acute interior fevers
usually develop from the acute stage of an invasion of external
Wind: both Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat may lead to an interior
fever. Thus, the fever discussed here is primarily an acute fever
deriving from external causes but at the interior stage. In such
acute fevers the identification of patterns according to the Four
Levels provides the best framework of interpretation and is
clinically more relevant than the identification of patterns
according to the Six Stages. However, there may be other acute
interior fevers that are of internal origin, for example from Damp-
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder (febrile episode of cholecystitis)
, or Damp-Heat in the Bladder (cystitis with fever) (
Fig 43.12
 
).
FIG. 43.12
 
Origin of acute fevers
The Four Levels
The Four Levels patterns are discussed in 
Chapter 104
 
. Within the
Four Levels, the Defensive-Qi level is the only Exterior one and
therefore there is simultaneous fever and shivering with a cold
feeling. At the other three levels (Qi, Nutritive Qi and Blood), Heat
is in the Interior and the fever is interior. The identification of
patterns according to the Four Levels describes the
symptomatology of invasions of Wind-Heat. However, fever, to a
lesser degree, may be present also in invasions of Wind-Cold, for
904
which the identification of patterns according to the Six Stages is
used.
The three interior levels, Qi, Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels,
within the Four Levels represent three different depths of
penetration of the Heat, the Qi being the most superficial (or
rather least deep) and Blood the deepest. At the Qi level, the
Upright Qi is still strong and it engages in a fight with the
pathogenic factors leading to a high fever and acute, strong
manifestations characterized by restlessness, high fever, profuse
sweating, etc. At the Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels, the Upright Qi
is injured, the Heat has injured the fluids and there is Yin
deficiency. These levels are usually characterized by a fever at
night and by the Mind being affected, causing delirium, severe
mental restlessness and, in severe cases, coma. At the Blood level,
internal Wind can develop and bleeding occurs. At the Blood level
and, to a lesser extent, at the Nutritive-Qi level, there are maculae.
The tongue is an important and objective sign to differentiate
the Qi level from the Nutritive-Qi level andthe Blood levels: at the
Qi level the tongue is Red and has a thick coating, whereas at the
Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels the tongue is dark Red and has no
coating.
The clinical manifestation of the Four Levels in fever is
summarized in 
Box 43.9
 
.
 
BOX 43.9
 
   
 
THE FOUR LEVELS IN A
NUTSHELL
• 
 
Defensive-Qi level
 
: fever, aversion to cold
• 
 
Qi level
 
: fever, feeling of heat, thirst
• 
 
Nutritive-Qi level
 
: fever at night, mental confusion,
maculae
• 
 
Blood level
 
: fever at night, mental confusion,
maculae, bleeding
The clinical manifestations of the Defensive-Qi level, which
causes a simultaneous feeling of cold and fever, have already been
discussed above. The detailed clinical manifestations of the main
905
patterns appearing at the Qi, Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels are
described below.
Heat in the Lungs (Qi level)
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, cough with yellow sputum, sweating,
thirst, a feeling of oppression or pain of the chest, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating and Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
This is one of the patterns appearing at the Qi level within the
Four Levels; it is characterized by acute, interior Lung-Heat. From
a Western perspective, it could correspond to acute bronchitis,
pneumonia or pleurisy. In this case there is an actual fever as well
as an objective hot feeling of the patient’s body.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs (Qi level)
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, cough with abundant sticky yellow
sputum, thirst, sweating, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
nausea, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating and Rapid-Slippery
pulse.
This is one of the possible patterns appearing at the Qi level
within the Four Levels; it is characterized by acute, interior Lung-
Heat with Phlegm.
Heat in Bright Yang – channel pattern
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, sweating, intense thirst, Big or
Overflowing pulse and Red tongue with yellow coating.
This corresponds to acute, interior Heat in the Stomach channel
and its manifestations are described by the Stomach-Heat level
within the Four Levels or the Bright-Yang channel pattern within
the Six Stages. This pattern is often summarized in a nutshell as
the ‘four big’, that is, high fever, intense thirst, profuse sweating
and Overflowing or Big pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang – organ pattern
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, abdominal pain and fullness, dry
stools, constipation, thirst, Red tongue with a thick, dry yellow,
brown or black coating and Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
This is the Dry-Heat in the Intestines level within the Four
Levels and is the same as the Bright Yang – organ pattern within
906
the Six Stages.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Intestines
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, thirst with no desire to drink, loose
stools, abdominal pain, a feeling of heaviness, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating and Slippery-Rapid pulse.
This is Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Intestines level within
the Four Levels.
Heat at Nutritive-Qi level
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever at night, thirst, dry mouth with no
desire to drink, mental restlessness, delirium, aphasia, coma, Red
tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
This is Heat at the Nutritive-Qi level within the Four Levels.
Heat at Blood level
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever at night, thirst, mental restlessness,
bleeding, convulsions, tremor, Red tongue without coating, Fine-
Rapid pulse.
This is Heat at the Blood level within the Four Levels.
In addition to the above interior patterns with internal fever of
the Four Levels, two commons patterns from interior Heat which
may give rise to an acute, internal fever are Damp-Heat in the Gall-
Bladder and Liver (as in acute cholecystitis) and Damp-Heat in the
Bladder (as in acute cystitis).
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder and Liver
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, bitter and sticky taste,
hypochondrial pain which may extend to the right shoulder and
scapula, irritability, a feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea,
vomiting, dark urine, tongue with Red sides and sticky yellow
tongue coating and Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Clinical manifestations
 
Fever, burning of urination, difficult
urination, scanty and dark urine, blood in the urine, mental
restlessness, sticky yellow tongue coating on the root of the tongue
907
and Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Chronic Fever
Chronic interior fevers may be due to Deficiency or Excess. Yin
deficiency is a common and obvious cause of chronic interior fever,
but Qi and Blood deficiency may also cause it. Among the Full
causes of internal fever are stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat and
Blood stasis. Thus, there are five main causes of chronic interior
fever:
 
• 
 
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency
• 
 
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat
• 
 
Blood stasis.
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency
Clinical manifestations
 
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the
afternoon or evening, five-palm heat, malar flush, thirst with
desire to drink in small sips, dry mouth and throat at night, mental
restlessness, night sweating, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, dry
stools, dark-scanty urination, a thin red line on the inside of the
lower eyelid, Red tongue without coating and with cracks, and
Fine-Rapid pulse.
These are the general symptoms of Empty-Heat deriving from
Yin deficiency; they may arise from the Lungs, Heart, Stomach,
Spleen, Liver and Kidneys. Other accompanying symptoms (or
more accentuated symptoms) according to the organ involved are
listed in 
Box 43.10
 
.
 
BOX 43.10
 
   
 
CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF EMPTY-HEAT
FROM YIN DEFICIENCY
• 
 
Lungs: dry throat, dry cough, malar flush
• 
 
Heart: insomnia, mental restlessness, dream-
disturbed sleep, malar flush, Red tip of the tongue
908
• 
 
Spleen: dry lips, dry stools
• 
 
Liver: dry eyes, red eyes, dream-disturbed sleep, Red
sides of the tongue
• 
 
Kidneys: dizziness, tinnitus
• 
 
Stomach: dry mouth, bleeding gums
Qi deficiency
Clinical manifestations
 
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat that is
aggravated by overwork, dizziness, tiredness, 
depression,
muscular weakness, spontaneous sweating, shortness of breath,
loose stools, poor appetite, weak voice, Pale tongue and Weak or
Empty pulse.
This fever is caused by a severe deficiency of Qi, usually of the
Spleen, Stomach and Lungs, and a deficiency of the Original Qi.
This situation was described by Li Dong Yuan in the famous classic
‘Discussion on Stomach and Spleen’ (
Pi Wei Lun
 
) (see
Bibliography). He said that overwork and irregular diet weaken the
Qi of the Stomach and Spleen and the Original Qi, which resides
in the Lower Field of Elixir (
Dan Tian
 
); here it shares a place with
the (physiological) Minister Fire. If the Minister Fire is stirred by
overwork and emotional problems, it becomes pathological,
‘displaces’ the Original Qi in the Lower Field of Elixir and it rises
upwards causing a low-grade fever or a feeling of heat (
Fig 43.13
 
).
909
FIG. 43.13
 
Pathology of Yin Fire
Li Dong Yuan called this pathological Minister Fire a ‘thief’ of
the Original Qi; the Heat generated by the pathological Minister
Fire is called ‘Yin Fire’ and it is neither Full- nor Empty-Heat,
although it is more similar to the latter. Li Dong Yuan said that this
Yin Fire is treated not by clearing it with bitter-cold herbs but by
tonifying the Original Qi with sweet-warm herbs: as the Minister
Fire and the Original Qi share the sameplace, tonifying the
Original Qi will automatically displace and subdue the
pathological Minister Fire.
The representative prescription to subdue Yin Fire is Bu Zhong
Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction,
 
within
which Ren Shen 
Radix Ginseng
 
tonifies the Original Qi.
This condition of Yin Fire and feeling of heat deriving from Qi
and Blood deficiency is very common nowadays and is frequently
seen in chronic cases of ME (CFIDS, postviral fatigue syndrome)
and other modern autoimmune diseases, such as lupus or
rheumatoid arthritis.
Blood deficiency
Clinical manifestations
 
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the
910
afternoon, dizziness, tingling, blurred vision, poor memory,
tiredness, depression, scanty periods, palpitations, dull and pale
complexion, pale lips, Pale-Thin tongue and Fine or Choppy pulse.
This fever is caused by a severe depletion of Blood and by
Empty-Heat resulting from it; it is more common in women and it
may occur after childbirth.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat
Clinical manifestations
 
Chronic low-grade fever or feeling of heat
that comes and goes according to the emotional state (it comes
when the person is upset), volatile mood, irritability, a feeling of
oppression and distension of the chest and hypochondrium, dry
throat, sighing, a bitter taste, irregular periods, premenstrual
tension, Red tongue with redder sides and thin-yellow coating and
Rapid-Wiry pulse.
This is due to Liver-Heat generated by chronic Liver-Qi
stagnation and is usually caused by chronic emotional problems.
Blood stasis
Clinical manifestations
 
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the
afternoon or evening, dry mouth, abdominal pain, dry skin and
nails, dark complexion, purple lips, Purple tongue and Choppy or
Firm pulse.
This is chronic Blood stasis and it is usually related to the Liver.
The manifestations of dryness are due not to Yin deficiency but to
Blood stasis. Due to the interactions and interchange between
Blood and Body Fluids, when Blood stagnates for a long time, it
cannot interchange with the Body Fluids and these fail to moisten
the body. Fever from chronic Blood stasis is frequently seen in
cancer.
FIVE-PALM HEAT
This is a feeling of heat in the palms, soles and chest, which is also
sometimes called five-centre heat or five-heart heat; this may or
may not be accompanied by an actual fever. It is usually
accompanied by mental restlessness, night sweating and
911
insomnia. This is frequently seen in practice; however, it may
sometimes manifest only in the soles and palms, or palms and
chest.
Yin deficiency of any organ may cause five-palm heat: Lungs,
Heart, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Stomach. However, there are other,
less common, possible causes of five-palm heat: these include
Blood deficiency, Latent Heat in the Lesser Yin and Liver-Fire.
In Blood deficiency, the five-palm heat is experienced mainly in
the afternoon and is accompanied by other symptoms of Blood
deficiency. This occurs almost exclusively in women.
Latent Heat in the Lesser Yin is characterized by Heat in the
Kidneys and is frequently seen in ME (postviral fatigue syndrome).
The main manifestations are a low-grade fever or feeling of heat in
the afternoon or evening, feeling cold in the morning, dizziness,
tinnitus and night sweating.
Liver-Fire may also cause five-palm heat although not
frequently; this symptom will be accompanied by other
manifestations of Liver-Fire.
Box 43.11
 
summarizes the patterns underlying five-palm heat.
 
BOX 43.11
 
   
 
FIVE-PALM HEAT
• 
 
Yin deficiency of any organ: this is the most common
pattern
• 
 
Blood deficiency: more common in women and occurs
more frequently in the afternoon
• 
 
Latent Heat in the Lesser Yin: occurs more frequently
in the evening with low-grade fever
• 
 
Liver-Fire: severe five-palm heat with a sudden onset
(not common)
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF
COLD AND HEAT IN INTERNAL
CONDITIONS
Contradictory hot and cold feelings are very common especially in
912
women and especially those over the age of 40. This is due to four
possible causes:
 
• 
 
simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang
• 
 
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Yin Fire.
Simultaneous Deficiency Of Kidney-Yin And
Kidney-Yang
A simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang is very
common in women over the age of 40; indeed, it is probably more
the norm than the exception. Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang have a
common root and, especially after 40, a deficiency of one often
involves also a deficiency of the other, albeit in different degrees.
Thus, when there is a deficiency of both Kidney-Yang and Kidney-
Yin with a predominance of the latter there will be dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, malar flush, five-palm heat and a feeling
of heat, but possibly also cold feet; when there is a predominance
of Kidney-Yang deficiency there will be dizziness, backache,
tinnitus, frequent urination, a pronounced feeling of cold and cold
feet, but possibly also a feeling of heat in the afternoon.
Blood Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Blood deficiency may also cause some Empty-Heat and therefore
contradictory hot and cold symptoms. In fact, Blood deficiency
may cause cold hands, but when Empty-Heat arises from it in
chronic cases there may be a feeling of heat in the face.
Disharmony Of The Penetrating Vessel
Contradictory hot and cold symptoms may be caused by a
disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel. When this vessel is deficient
(which involves a Kidney deficiency), a deficiency of Qi in its
913
descending branch may cause cold feet while the ascending
rebellious Qi may cause a feeling of heat in the face.
Yin Fire
Finally, Yin Fire may cause a person to feel cold in general and
experience occasional feeling of heat in the face. The pathology of
Yin Fire has already been explained above.
Box 43.12
 
summarizes the patterns underlying contradictory
feeling of heat and cold.
 
BOX 43.12
 
   
 
CONTRADICTORY FEELING
OF COLD AND FEELING OF HEAT
• 
 
Simultaneous deficiency of both Kidney-Yin and
Kidney-Yang: cold feet, feeling of heat and five-palm
heat or heat in afternoon
• 
 
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat: cold hands, heat in
face
• 
 
Disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel with rebellious
Qi: cold feet, heat in face
• 
 
Yin Fire: cold in general, low-grade fever or feeling of
heat
NOTES
1. 
Tao, Deng Tie. Practical Chinese Diagnosis (
Shi Yong Zhong
Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science
Publishing House, 1988; 90.
2. 
Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of
Chinese Medicine. An Explanation of the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang Han Lun Yi Shi
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1980; 351.
3. 
Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of
Chinese Medicine. An Explanation of the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang Han Lun Yi Shi
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1980; 351.
4. 
Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of
914
Chinese Medicine. An Explanation of the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang Han Lun Yi Shi
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1980; 354.
915
CHAPTER 44
 
MENTAL—
EMOTIONAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
DEPRESSION
Definition of depression
Diagnosis of depression
Depression in Chinese medicine
Patterns in depression
FEAR/ANXIETY
IRRITABILITY/ANGER
WORRY/OVERTHINKING
SADNESS/GRIEF
EXCESS JOY
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
916
INTRODUCTION
 
WHY
 
WE ASK
The area of questioning surrounding the emotions experienced by
the patient is one of the most important, if not 
the
 
most important
one. Emotional causes of disease play a very prominent role in the
aetiology and clinical manifestations of most of our patients.
Therefore we should always ask patients about their emotional life.
However, some patients may regard an enquiry about their
emotional life as an intrusion and we should be sensitive about
this.
The emotional state of the patient reflects of course the state of
their Mind and Spirit and the findings from interrogation need to
be carefully integrated with those gleaned from observation,
particularly observation of the lustre (
shen
 
) of the eyes. In
addition, the state of the patient’s Mind and Spirit is an important
prognostic factor.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Enquiry about a patient’s emotional life must be closely integrated
with observation (especially of the eyes, complexion and tongue),
with palpation (of the pulse) and with hearing (voice).
If the emotional condition is not the presenting problem, I
generally ask about a patient’s emotional life towards the end of
the consultation to try to find the cause of the disease. In many
cases, the emotional state of the patient is the main presenting
problem; for example, patients may come to us because they are
depressed or anxious. In other cases, the emotional state of the
patient is the underlying cause of physical 
symptoms; for example,
a patient may complain of tiredness and digestive symptoms when
frustration and resentment may be the cause of the condition.
Unless the patient comes specifically seeking help for an
emotional state such as depression, irritability or anxiety, I
generally ask about the patient’s emotions when the pattern
917
emerging from the interrogation, together with observation of the
eyes and tongue and palpation of the pulse, strongly points to an
emotional cause of disease. For example, if the Lung pulse is
somewhat full and the patient looks sad, I may try and find out
whether sadness or grief has been experienced that has not been
expressed (the fullness of the Lung pulse would indicate this).
If the Heart pulse is Overflowing and there is a Heart crack on
the tongue, I may enquire whether the patient has suffered from a
shock. If the Lung pulse is particularly Weak and without wave and
the eyes lack lustre, I may explore whether events in the patient’s
life have caused sadness or grief. If the pulse is Wiry on all
positions I ask the patient whether some life situation is causing
frustration, anger or resentment. If the Heart pulse is Choppy, the
complexion dull, the eyes lustreless and the voice weak and weepy,
I will try and determine whether the patient is sad.
There are two main reasons why I ask a patient to confirm what
I suspect from observation, palpation and hearing. First, it engages
patients more with the treatment and, by making them aware of a
possible emotional cause of their symptoms, it may further their
healing process. Secondly, even if the eyes lack lustre, there is a
deep Heart crack on the tongue and the pulse is Sad, this may be
caused by a severe physical illness such as cancer, or a treatment
such as chemotherapy (which may weaken even the strongest of
Spirits).
It is important to be sensitive when asking about the emotional
state of the patient (if this is not the presenting problem) and
often it is observation that gives us a clue about the emotional
state, in which case I would ask the patient about it. For example, a
patient may come in complaining of tiredness and premenstrual
breast distension: if the eyes of the patient lack lustre, I would
suspect emotional stress to be the cause of the problem and I
would circumspectly ask the patient about it.
It is important to mention, however, that in most cases of
treating emotional symptoms, or symptoms which are caused by
emotional problems, observation should take precedence over
what a patient verbally reports. It is most often when we see
beyond what a patient is telling us that we find the true cause of a
disease.
918
HOW
 
WE ASK
As mentioned above, we must use great sensitivity when asking
patients about their emotions.
First of all, we should ask only if they appear willing to talk
about their emotions and respect their wish if they do not want to
do so. If I suspect that emotional stress is the cause of a problem I
ask questions like ‘Have you suffered any shock in the past?’, ‘Do
you tend to feel irritable about some situation?’ or ‘Do you
sometimes feel sad?’, etc.
Of course, if the patient comes to us specifically for an
emotional condition, the questioning is conducted differently as
the patient will openly volunteer the information.
DEPRESSION
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 79
Depression is a very common symptom in Western patients,
even though some patients may not admit to being depressed and
others may not even recognize that they are depressed.
Definition Of Depression
‘Depression’ is a modern Western term which indicates a change
in mood ranging from a very mild feeling of despondency to the
most abject depression and despair. In mild depression the change
in mood varies and is not permanent, whereas in severe
depression the change in mood is fixed and persists over a period
of months or years. Severe depression is also accompanied by
characteristic changes in behaviour, attitude, thinking efficiency
and physiological functioning. Of course, it is normal to experience
a temporary feeling of depression following adverse life events
such as bereavement. In distinguishing a normal reaction from
pathological depression a quantitative judgement has to be made.
If the precipitant seems inadequate, or the depression appears too
severe or too long lasting, the condition may be regarded as
abnormal. In addition, the severity and incapacity in depressive
illness differ qualitatively as well as quantitatively from depressed
919
feelings that are part of normal experiences.
Depression is twice as common in women as in men and its
onset increases towards middle age. The main symptoms of
depression are depressed mood, loss of interest, self-esteem or
motivation, fatigue, anxiety, insomnia and loss of appetite. In very
severe cases, the patient never comes out of an extremely
depressed mood, is unable to experience any pleasure at any time,
is in utter despair and may be suicidal. A major depressive
syndrome has the following characteristics:
 
• 
 
very depressed mood most of the day nearly every day
• 
 
markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all or
almost all activities most of the day, nearly every day
• 
 
significant weight loss (or gain), decrease (or
increase) in appetite
• 
 
insomnia or sleepiness
• 
 
psychomotor agitation or retardation every day
• 
 
fatigue nearly every day
• 
 
feelings of worthlessness or guilt (which may be
delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or
guilt about being ill)
• 
 
diminished ability to think or concentrate,
indecisiveness nearly every day
• 
 
recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal
ideation without a specific plan or a suicide attempt or a
specific plan for committing suicide.
In addition to the above manifestations, a major depressive
syndrome is also defined by the absence of the following: an
organic factor, a normal reaction to bereavement, delusions or
hallucinations in the absence of mood symptoms, schizophrenia,
delusional disorder, psychotic disorder.
 
1
Diagnosis Of Depression
Asking patients about feelings of depression should always be
part of our questions about the patient’s emotional state and it
920
should be carried out with sensitivity and tact. In fact, some
patients will not want to admit to being depressed, some will
admit to being depressed but do not necessarily want to talk about
it, and others may not even realize that they are in a state of
depression. These patients will often complain only of physical
symptoms such as extreme tiredness, lack of motivation and
feeling cold, preferring not to face up to the fact that they may be
depressed. In China this is more the norm than the exception as
Chinese patients will seldom complain of feeling ‘depressed’ and
somatization of their feelings of depression into bodily symptoms
is often seen.
Signs of depression
 
In patients who are not aware of being
depressed, Chinese diagnosis often enables us to recognize the
true condition of the patient’s mental–emotional state. In fact
there are certain signs that point to mental depression as the root
cause of the patient’s problems and these are:
 
• 
 
the complexion
• 
 
the eyes
• 
 
the tongue
• 
 
the voice
• 
 
the pulse.
The complexion of a severely depressed person will lack lustre
and will tend to be greyish or greenish; the eyes will also lack
sparkle (
shen
 
); the tongue has a Red tip and may have a deep
Heart crack; and the voice will be low and lacking vitality.
The pulse in a depressed person varies according to whether the
condition is primarily Full or Empty. In Full conditions, the pulse
feels very Wiry or Wiry and Slippery, whereas in Empty conditions
(especially when sadness and grief prevail) the pulse is Weak or
Choppy, often Short and nearly always lacks a ‘wave’ (Sad pulse).
Interestingly, very often the pulse of a depressed person may point
to the true cause of the problem being repressed anger; in fact, in
some cases, a depressed patient may display many signs pointing
to an Empty condition (low voice, dull complexion, slow
movements) while the pulse is very Wiry. This usually indicates
921
that the patient’s depression is due to repressed anger. Vice versa,
a pulse that is Choppy, Short or Sad indicates that sadness or grief
is the prevalent emotion at the root of the depression.
Depression In Chinese Medicine
In Chinese medicine, mental depression was called 
Yin Yu,
 
which
means ‘gloominess’ or ‘depression’ or, 
Yu Zheng,
 
which means
‘depression pattern’. 
Yu
 
has the double meaning of ‘depression’
and ‘stagnation’, which implies that, according to this theory,
mental depression is always caused by a stagnation.
In fact, the ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 71
 
mentions the Five
Stagnations of Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal 
and Water.
 
2
 
The ‘Essential
Method of Dan Xi’ (
Dan Xi Xin Fa
 
, 1347) describes six stagnations
of Qi, Blood, Dampness, Phlegm, Heat and Food. It says: 
‘When Qi
and Blood are harmonized, no disease arises. If they stagnate
diseases arise. Many diseases are due to stagnation… stagnation
makes things accumulate so that they cannot flow freely, they
would like to rise but cannot, they would like to descend but
cannot, they would like to transform but cannot … thus the 6
Stagnations come into being.’
 
3
The ‘Complete Book of Jing Yue’ (
Jing Yue Quan Shu,
 
1624) gives
stagnation an emotional interpretation and talks about Six
Stagnations of anger, pensiveness, worry, sadness, shock and fear.
This confirms that all emotions can lead to stagnation of Qi. It
says: 
‘In the 6 Stagnations, stagnation is the cause of the disease. In
emotional stagnation, the disease [i.e. the emotion] is the cause of
the stagnation.’
 
4
Patterns In Depression
Chinese books normally ascribe mental depression to Liver-Qi
stagnation in its various manifestations including Liver-Qi
stagnation turning into Heat and Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm.
In the later stages of mental depression, Empty patterns appear.
Thus, although in Chinese medicine stagnation and depression are
almost synonymous, Empty patterns may also cause depression.
In severe depression, the Liver is always involved owing to its
922
housing the Ethereal Soul (
Hun
 
). The Ethereal Soul is responsible
for our life’s dreams, plans, ideas, projects, relationship with other
people, etc. The Ethereal Soul was often described as ‘the coming
and going of the Mind (
Shen
 
)’: this means that the Ethereal Soul
assists the Mind in giving it the capacity to have dreams, plans,
ideas, projects, etc. In this sense, the Ethereal Soul gives the Mind
‘movement’, outward projection and ability to form relationships
with other people, hence its ‘coming and going’ described above.
On the other hand, the Mind guides and controls the Ethereal Soul
and, most of all, integrates the activity of the Ethereal Soul within
the overall psychic life of the person.
Thus, if the ‘movement’ of the Ethereal Soul is lacking (either
through its lack of activity or through overcontrol of the Mind), the
person is depressed; if the ‘movement’ of the Ethereal Soul is
excessive (either through its overactivity or through lack of control
by the Mind), the person may display manic behaviour (bearing in
mind that the latter may vary in intensity and seriousness from
full-blown bipolar disease to much less severe manifestations that
are relatively common also in mentally healthy individuals).
When a person is severely depressed, the Ethereal Soul is not
‘coming and going’ enough, and therefore the person lacks
dreams, has lost faith in the future, does not know which direction
to take in life and has a feeling of loss, isolation and separation.
From this point of view, many Liver (and other organs) patterns,
and not just Liver-Qi stagnation, may cause depression. When the
Ethereal Soul ‘comes and goes’ too much, the person may develop
manic behaviour; in this case, the person has lots of dreams,
projects and ideas but nothing comes to fruition because of the
chaotic state of the Ethereal Soul and the lack of control of this by
the Mind.
Figure 44.1
 
illustrates the two states of the Ethereal Soul: when it
‘comes and goes’ too much; and when it does not ‘come and go’
enough.
923
FIG. 44.1
 
The ‘coming and going’ of the Ethereal Soul
Essential to the proper movement of the Ethereal Soul is its
restraint by the Mind. The Mind (
Shen
 
of the Heart) needs to
restrain the Ethereal Soul (but not too much) and integrate the
material coming from it into the totality of the psyche. If the Mind
controls and restrains the Ethereal Soul too much, depression
ensues; if the Mind fails to control and restrain the Ethereal Soul,
manic behaviours may result (
Fig 44.2
 
).
924
FIG. 44.2
 
Relationship between the Mind and the Ethereal Soul
The lack of ‘movement’ of the Ethereal Soul and hence
depression may be due to pathogenic factors inhibiting the
Ethereal Soul (e.g. Liver-Qi stagnation), 
or to a deficiency of the
Liver, Spleen or Kidneys not stimulating the Ethereal Soul. The
excessive movement of the Ethereal Soul and hence manic
behaviour may be due to pathogenic factors overstimulating the
Ethereal Soul (e.g. Fire or Phlegm-Fire), or to the lack of anchoring
of this Soul from a deficiency of Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin, or both.
Note that Liver-Blood deficiency may lead to lack of movement of
the Ethereal Soul when it is combined with Liver-Qi deficiency
(itself associated with deficiency of Gall-Bladder Qi); otherwise,
deficient Liver-Blood fails to house the Ethereal Soul and this leads
to excessive movement.
Box 44.1
 
summarizes patterns relating to ‘movement’ of the
Ethereal Soul.
 
BOX 44.1
 
   
 
‘MOVEMENT’ OF THE
ETHEREAL SOUL
Lack of movement of the Ethereal Soul
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Liver-Blood and Liver-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Spleen and Kidney deficiency
925
Excessive movement of the Ethereal Soul
• 
 
Fire
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire
• 
 
Liver-Blood/Liver-Yin deficiency
Figure 44.3
 
illustrates the Liver patterns leading to excessive and
to deficient movement of the Ethereal Soul.
FIG. 44.3
 
Patterns leading to excessive and deficient movement of
the Ethereal Soul
When diagnosing the prevailing patterns in depressed patients,
it is important to differentiate between Full and Empty conditions;
as the mood of depressed patients is the same in both cases, the
main differentiating signs are the pulse and the tongue. In Full
conditions causing depression, the pulse is usually Wiry or
Slippery and Wiry, while in Empty conditions it is Choppy, Short or
Sad. As depression is often accompanied by anxiety, this is
obviously more pronounced in Full than in Empty conditions.
The main Full patterns accompanying depression are:
 
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation with Qi-Phlegm
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Mind
926
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Heat.
• 
 
diaphragm Heat.
The main Empty patterns accompanying depression are:
 
• 
 
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Kidney- and Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency.
For a detailed description of these patterns, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter
79
 
.
Box 44.2
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of these
patterns.
 
BOX 44.2
 
   
 
DEPRESSION
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: depression, moodiness,
irritability
• 
 
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat: depression,
irritability, Red tongue
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation with Qi-Phlegm: depression,
moodiness, feeling of a lump in the throat
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Mind: depression, anxiety,
agitation, expectoration of phlegm, Swollen tongue
• 
 
Heart-Blood stasis: depression, agitation, Purple
tongue
• 
 
Gall-Bladder Heat: depression, irritability, bitter taste,
hypochondrial fullness
• 
 
Diaphragm Heat: depression, anxiety, feeling of
stuffiness in the chest following an invasion of Wind-
Heat
• 
 
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency: depression,
insomnia, palpitations, tiredness
927
• 
 
Heart-Yang deficiency: depression, palpitations, cold
hands
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: depression, lack of sense of
direction, sadness
• 
 
Kidney- and Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat: depression, anxiety, night sweating, palpitations,
Red tongue without coating
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency: depression, lack of
motivation, lack of will-power, feeling cold, frequent
urination
FEAR/ANXIETY
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 79
A chronic feeling of anxiety (occurring on its own without
depression) is very common in Western patients. A feeling of
anxiety includes emotional states akin to the emotions of fear and
worry (two of the seven emotions) in Chinese medicine. It may be
accompanied or caused by deficiency (usually of Blood or Yin), by
Excess (usually Heat) or by a combination of Deficiency and Excess
(usually Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat).
The main patterns in anxiety are listed in 
Box 44.3
 
.
 
BOX 44.3
 
   
 
PATTERNS IN ANXIETY
Empty
• 
 
Deficiency of Blood
• 
 
Deficiency of Yin
Full
• 
 
Heat
Full/Empty
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
928
When there is a deficiency of Blood or Yin, the Mind and
Ethereal Soul lose their ‘residence’ in the Heart-Blood and Liver-
Blood respectively and the person becomes anxious and sleeps
badly. Conversely, pathogenic factors such as Qi stagnation, Blood
stasis, Heat or Phlegm-Heat may ‘agitate’ the Mind and Ethereal
Soul and lead to anxiety and insomnia. In some cases, of course,
the Mind and Ethereal Soul are restless both from a deficiency (e.g.
Yin deficiency) and a pathogenic factor (e.g. Empty-Heat). 
Figure
44.2
 
illustrates graphically the two causes of anxiety, that is, a
Deficiency leading to the Mind’s not being ‘anchored’ (
Fig 44.2
 
,
bottom) or a pathogenic factor ‘agitating’ the Mind (
Fig 44.2
 
, top).
As a general rule, the degree of anxiety or fear depends on
whether it is caused by an Empty or a Full condition: in Empty
conditions it is mild whereas in Full conditions it is severe.
It is usually easy to see whether patients are anxious: they look
restless, their voice may be quivering, they may fidget, talk a lot (in
the case of a Full condition) or be very quiet (in the case of an
Empty condition), and may be very anxious about receiving
acupuncture. In a few cases, however, a state of anxiety may not be
apparent in patients who make a brave attempt to hide their true
state. In fact, those who are in a constant state of fear may initially
appear to be calm and grounded. In these cases, the tongue, pulse
and eyes may reveal the patient’s state of anxiety or fear. The
tongue may have a Red tip, often with a deep Heart crack, the
pulse may be Wiry (in case of a Full condition) or Floating-Empty
(in case of an Empty condition) and Rapid, and the eyes may look
‘unstable’ and lack control (see 
Part 1
 
, 
Chapter 6
 
).
Case history 44.1
 
illustrates a pattern underlying panic attacks.
 
Case History 44.1
A 39-year-old woman had been suffering from panic
attacks for the past 6 years. During the attacks her
throat would become tense, she felt as if she were
unable to swallow, she became slightly breathless, had
palpitations and felt hot. They occurred every day and
became worse after eating lunch. It was interesting to
note that when the patient was describing the attacks
she repeatedly mentioned the word ‘throat’.
The patient also mentioned that she suffered from
929
night sweats. Her periods were unproblematic but she
did become aggressive premenstrually.
The tongue body was Swollen, slightly peeled on the
root and very slightly Red on the sides and tip. Her
pulse was very Weak in the left Rear position and
Overflowing in the left Front position.
Diagnosis:
The panic attacks are caused by rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel. The clinical manifestations
displayed by this patient are fairly typical of the
Penetrating Vessel’s pathology of Qi rebelling upwards
along its pathway. The Penetrating Vessel flows up
through the abdomen and chest, along the line of the
Kidney channel and flowing through the Heart on its
way up to the throat and face. It therefore influences
the Heart and chest area and, in this case, is causing the
symptoms of palpitations and breathlessness. The
symptoms associated with the syndrome of Qi rebelling
upwards in the Penetrating Vessel were called 
Li Ji
 
,
which literally means ‘internal urgency’, and it
indicates a state of anxiety and panic, as in this case.
The tension in the throat and difficulty in swallowing
are caused by the Qi of the Penetrating Vessel rebelling
upwards. The feeling of heat is caused by the Qi of the
Penetrating Vessel rushing up to the face: this is
reflected in the Overflowing quality of the pulse on the
left Front position and the Weak quality on the left Rear
position. This pulse reflects clearly the deficiency of the
Penetrating Vessel in the Lower Burner and the
subsequent rushing upwards of the rebellious Qi to the
face. It should be remembered that the pulse positions
reflect not only the organs but also the areas of the
body and their respective channels; in this case there is
Emptiness below (the lower abdomen) and Fullness
above (throat and face) making the pulse Weak in the
third position and Overflowing in the first.
However, in this case, the pulse is reflecting also a
930
pathology of the relevant organs. The Weak pulse on
the left Rear position indicates a Kidney deficiency,
predominantly of Kidney-Yin, as evidenced by the
peeling of the root of the tongue and the night
sweating. The Overflowing quality on the left Front
position indicates Heart-Heat, which is evidenced also
by the Red tip of the tongue.
The swelling of the tongue indicates the presence of
Phlegm but the patient has no symptoms of this at
present; such cases highlight the preventative value of
tongue diagnosis and I would therefore resolve Phlegm
even in the absence of symptoms.
The fact that, when describing her symptoms, the
patient repeatedly and emphatically said the word
‘throat’ may indicate that the origin of her condition is
an emotional one and that she had felt unable to
express herself, leading to a feeling of restriction in the
throat area.
For a detailed description of the patterns accompanying anxiety
and fear, see 
Part 5
 
, 
Chapter 79
 
.
Box 44.4
 
summarizes the main patterns and their clinical
manifestations.
 
BOX 44.4
 
   
 
FEAR/ANXIETY
Empty
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: mild anxiety, insomnia,
palpitations
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency: anxiety that is worse in the
evening, palpitations, night sweating
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: mild anxiety, depression,
insomnia
• 
 
Liver-Yin deficiency: mild anxiety, depression,
insomnia, tongue without coating
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: anxiety that is worse in the
evening, lack of will-power, dizziness, tinnitus
931
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi of the Heart and Gall-Bladder: mild
anxiety, insomnia, timidity
Full
• 
 
Heart-Fire: severe anxiety, palpitations, Red tongue
with coating
• 
 
Heart-Blood stasis: severe anxiety, palpitations, Purple
tongue
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Mind: severe anxiety, manic
behaviour, Swollen tongue
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: anxiety, depression, irritability,
hypochondrial distension
• 
 
Liver-Fire: severe, anxiety, headache, thirst, Red
tongue, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: anxiety, headache, dizziness
• 
 
Rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel: anxiety,
panicky feeling, feeling of constriction of the throat,
palpitation, tightness of the chest, abdominal fullness,
Firm pulse
• 
 
Diaphragm-Heat: anxiety and feeling of stuffiness in
the region under the heart following an invasion of
Wind-Heat
Full/Empty
• 
 
Kidney- and Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat: anxiety that is worse in the evening: dizziness,
tinnitus, palpitations
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: anxiety that is
worse in the evening, palpitations, Red tongue without
coating
IRRITABILITY/ANGER
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 79
Irritability is a common emotional complaint. It includes feeling
irritable frequently, flying off the handle easily, feeling frustrated,
932
and similar emotional states. Of the traditional seven emotions,
irritability is akin to ‘anger’ but it encompasses a broader range of
emotional states and is generally not so intense. A propensity to
anger is generally due to Liver patterns, whereas irritability may
be caused by many different patterns affecting most organs.
In particular, the patterns that may cause irritability include:
 
• 
 
Qi stagnation
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Yin deficiency (with or without Empty-Heat)
• 
 
Heat (including Damp-Heat)
• 
 
Empty-Heat.
Therefore, irritability may be due to Full or Empty causes; in
general, the irritability from Empty causes is mild and somewhat
vague, whereas that due to Full causes is more intense. The
interrogation, therefore, should first of all try to establish the Full
or Empty character of the irritability. In Empty conditions, the
patient may say ‘I get easily annoyed’, or ‘Things that did not use
to get to me, now do’, etc. In Full conditions, the patient may say
something like ‘I feel always irritable’, ‘I feel so on edge that I take
it out on my children’, etc.
Box 44.5
 
links examples of patterns that may cause irritability
and examples of patients’ expressions.
 
BOX 44.5
 
   
 
EXAMPLES OF PATIENTS’
EXPRESSIONS IN PATTERNS
CAUSING IRRITABILITY
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: ‘
I feel extremely irritable before my
periods and take it out on my family
 
.’
• 
 
Lung-Qi stagnation: ‘
I feel this lump in the throat, I am
on edge and feel like bursting into tears
 
.’
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis: ‘
I seethe with resentment
 
.’
• 
 
Heart-Blood stasis: ‘
My mind is constantly judging and I
feel resentful
 
.’
933
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising: ‘
I fly off the handle easily
 
.’
• 
 
Liver-Fire: ‘
I explode into a rage
 
.’
• 
 
Heart-Fire: ‘
I feel irritable, impatient and angry
 
.’
• 
 
Lung-Heat: ‘
I feel frustrated, weepy and irritable
 
.’
• 
 
Stomach-Heat: ‘
I feel often angry and obsessive
 
.’
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: ‘
I feel lost, overwhelmed and on
edge and I can’t cope
 
.’
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency: ‘
I feel helpless, unmotivated and
on edge in the evening
 
.’
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: ‘
I feel sad and on edge, and I
can’t cope
 
.’
• 
 
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: ‘
I feel hot and
bothered
 
.’
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: ‘
I feel sad and
hot and bothered
 
.’
• 
 
Damp-Heat: ‘
I feel heavy, yucky and irritable
 
.’
WORRY/OVERTHINKING
Many patients complain of a propensity to worry and overthinking
and, even if it is not the presenting condition, many people profess
to it when asked. The emotion of worry is related to the Spleen,
and overthinking is more akin to the Lungs. Worry describes a
condition when the patient is prone to imagining the worst
possible outcome in a certain situation, for example a mother who
imagines that her son has been in an accident when he is late
home. Overthinking describes a state where the patient is unable
to empty the mind of repetitive thoughts, which may be of a
relatively trivial nature. Molehills may become mountains in these
patients’ minds when an apparently insignificant issue develops
into a cause of great concern.
A propensity to worry and overthinking is most commonly
caused by, and may in turn cause, an Empty condition. A deficiency
of Spleen-Qi or Spleen-Blood, or both, is the most commonly seen
pattern leading to worry and overthinking. However, deficiency of
Heart-Qi, Lung-Qi, Heart-Yin, or of Heart- or Liver-Blood, or both,
934
may also lead to excessive worrying.
There are also cases where overthinking is caused by a mixed or
Full condition, namely stagnation of Lung-Qi or Yin deficiency and
Empty-Heat. Worry from a Full condition (such as Lung-Qi
stagnation) is usually more intense and consuming than that from
an Empty condition, which a patient may describe as more ‘lurking
in the background’.
Box 44.6
 
summarizes patterns underlying worry and
overthinking.
 
BOX 44.6
 
   
 
WORRY/OVERTHINKING
• 
 
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency: worry, slightly
obsessive thinking, slight depression, overthinking, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse
• 
 
Lung-Qi deficiency: worry, depression, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: worry, depression, Pale and
Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: worry which increases after
the period in women, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency: worry, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, propensity to be
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot
and bothered’, Floating-Empty pulse, especially on the
left Front position
• 
 
Lung-Qi stagnation: worry, mild irritability,
depression, a feeling of a lump in the throat, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very
slightly Tight on the right Front position
• 
 
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: worry,
especially in the evening, anxiety, propensity to be
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot
and bothered’, Red tongue, redder on the tip, no
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
SADNESS/GRIEF
935
‘Sadness’, which pertains to the Lungs, must be distinguished
from a ‘lack of joy’, which pertains to the Heart. Sadness is an
emotional state that weakens the Lungs and usually manifests
with Lung-related symptoms such as a pale complexion, a weepy
and weak voice. Lack of joy, on the other hand, is not an actual
emotional state but a certain lack of vitality deriving from Heart
deficiency; this manifests not with a sad demeanour, but with a
flatness and lack of ‘fire’.
A patient may report a feeling of sadness, or may be unaware of
it. A Full or Empty quality on the Lung pulse is usually the most
reliable indication of whether sadness is involved in a presenting
condition. I find that a Full Lung pulse often indicates sadness
which has been held on to for a long time by the patient, who may
be totally unaware of its presence. When the Lung pulse is Weak or
Empty, I find the patient more likely to report feeling sad.
Sadness depletes Lung- and Heart-Qi; however, with time, the
deficiency of Qi in the chest may also give rise to some stagnation
of Qi in the chest. This stagnation is associated with the Lungs and
Heart and not the Liver. It manifests with a slight feeling of
tightness of the chest, experiencing the sadness in the chest,
sighing and slight palpitations.
The most likely Empty patterns giving rise to sadness are a
deficiency of Lung-Qi and Heart-Qi, Liver-Blood or Heart-Blood.
When sadness is due to an Empty condition it is often
accompanied by frequent crying. Sadness from Liver-Blood
deficiency is more common in women and becomes worse after
the period or after childbirth. Sadness with a feeling of lump in the
throat may be due to Lung-Qi stagnation.
Grief is akin to sadness and usually derives from loss, separation
or bereavement. Like sadness, it depletes Lung- and Heart-Qi but,
with time, it may also give rise to some stagnation of Qi in the
chest causing similar symptoms to the ones mentioned above for
sadness.
Case history 44.2
 
illustrates a pattern of grief underlying chest
pain.
 
Case History 44.2
A 57-year-old woman presented with the main
complaint of pain in the chest. As she was speaking, I
936
observed that her eyes were quite lustreless and lacking
in 
shen
 
. This always points to an emotional origin of the
problem. I asked her how long she had had the chest
pain and she replied that it had started after her
husband’s death a few years before.
Her tongue was Swollen with a red tip and her pulse
was slightly Slippery but very slightly Tight on the Lung
position.
Diagnosis:
This is a very good example of the effect of grief. The
grief from her husband’s death had caused initially a
deficiency of the Heart and Lungs; with time, this had
caused some stagnation of Qi in these two organs. The
stagnation of Heart-Qi manifested with a red tip of the
tongue while the stagnation of Qi in both Heart and
Lungs caused the chest pain. As this condition was
long-standing, the depletion and simultaneous
stagnation of Lung-Qi had disrupted the movement
and transformation of Qi and fluids, giving rise to some
Phlegm in the chest which contributed to the chest
pain. The Phlegm was indicated by the swelling of the
tongue and the Slippery pulse.
This patient had an interesting emotional reaction to
the treatment which is worth reporting. I used a simple
treatment needling PE-6 Neiguan on one side, LU-7
Lieque on the other, Ren-12 Zhongwan and ST-40
Fenglong. A few days after the treatment she went to
the graveyard to visit her husband’s grave for the first
time since his death and she cried. She had obviously
repressed her grief for many years and this had caused
the stagnation of Qi of the Heart and Lungs in the
chest. Another emotional reaction a few days after the
treatment was that for the first time she experienced
anger at work. This is also interesting as, just as there is
a controlling relationship between Wood and Metal,
there is one between their allied emotions (i.e. anger
and sadness/grief). Obviously the release of Qi
937
stagnation in Metal had stopped excessive control of
Metal over Wood and led to an explosion of anger.
Moreover, each emotion can counteract another across
the reverse Controlling (
Ke
 
) cycle of the Five Elements;
that is, anger (Wood) counteracts sadness (Metal), joy
(Fire) counteracts fear (Water), pensiveness (Earth)
counteracts anger (Wood), etc.
Box 44.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying sadness and grief.
 
BOX 44.7
 
   
 
SADNESS/GRIEF
• 
 
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency: sadness, crying,
depression, Pale tongue, Empty pulse
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: sadness, crying, worse after
the period or childbirth (women), mental confusion,
aimlessness, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: sadness, crying, depression,
Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse
• 
 
Lung-Qi stagnation: sadness with feeling of a lump in
the throat, mild irritability, depression, tongue slightly
Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very slightly
Tight on the right Front position
EXCESS JOY
Of course, few patients will report feeling excessively joyful! A
normal state of joy is obviously not a cause of disease. Several
emotional states are included under the term of ‘excess joy’. First,
it includes the sudden state of extreme elation deriving from joyful
news. This makes Qi rise and it expands the Heart. Secondly,
excess joy can be interpreted as a life characterized by excessive
excitement and stimulation. This also causes Qi to rise and may
lead to Heart-Fire. Thirdly, excess joy is seen in certain mental
conditions such as hypomania or manic behaviour.
938
The negative effect of excess joy can be easily observed in young
children. Every mother knows that a period of extreme playfulness,
hyperactivity and laughing is frequently followed by tears.
A Full pattern of the Heart is most likely to cause excess joy.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart may cause the most severe cases
of excess joy; that seen in mental diseases such as bipolar disorder
is a typical example of this. However, Phlegm-Fire does not
necessarily 
always
 
cause severe symptoms. It may be seen
relatively frequently in milder forms when it causes excessive and
inappropriate laughter, bouts of excess joy and hyperactivity.
Heart-Fire may also cause a permanently elated mood.
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart does not always
manifest with severe mental symptoms.
Empty-Heat of the Heart may also lead to excess joy and a
feeling of being driven and not being able to stop.
Box 44.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying excess joy.
 
BOX 44.8
 
   
 
EXCESS JOY
• 
 
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart: excess joy, mental
confusion, excessive and inappropriate laughter, mental
restlessness, Red tongue with redder swollen tip, Heart
crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-
Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: Excess joy, permanently elated mood,
excessive laughter, mental restlessness, feeling of
agitation, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart Empty-Heat: excess joy, permanently elated
feeling as if being driven, anxiety, propensity to be
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot
and bothered’, Red tongue, redder on the tip, no
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
939
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
‘Mental restlessness’ is a translation of the term 
Fan Zao,
 
which
literally means ‘vexation and restlessness’. It also includes restless
legs. The term 
Fan Zao
 
encompasses two different symptoms: 
Fan
(vexation) is due to Full-Heat and pertains to the Lungs, whereas
Zao
 
(restlessness) 
is due to Empty-Heat and pertains to the
Kidneys. 
Fan
 
is Yang whereas 
Zao
 
is Yin.
A patient is unlikely to use the term ‘mental restlessness’ but
may describe having ‘difficulty in concentration’, ‘not being able
to focus on one thing for any length of time’ or ‘not being able to
sit still and do nothing’.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat may cause a vague feeling of
mental restlessness which worsens in the evening. Phlegm-Heat in
the Stomach or Heart, or both, or Heart-Fire, will cause a more
intense feeling which may be accompanied by mental confusion.
Mental restlessness may also be caused by Lung-Heat, in which
cause it will be accompanied by worry and other Lung symptoms
such as breathlessness or cough.
Box 44.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying mental
restlessness.
 
BOX 44.9
 
   
 
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat: vague mental
restlessness, restless legs, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach and Heart: mental
restlessness, mental confusion, agitation, rash
behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people, shouting,
depression, manic behaviour, tongue Red in the centre
with a sticky yellow coating and a Stomach/Heart crack
with a rough, sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-
Rapid pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: pronounced mental restlessness, agitation,
Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Lung-Heat: mental restlessness, worry, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse
940
NOTES
1. 
Jamison, KR. Touched with Fire – Manic-Depressive Illness
and the Artistic Temperament. New York: The Free Press,
1993; 261–262.
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:492 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House,
1986; 121.
4. 
Cited in Yu, Zhang Bo. Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke
Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House,
1986; 121.
941
CHAPTER 45
 
SEXUAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
MEN
Impotence
Lack of libido
Premature ejaculation
Nocturnal emissions
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation
WOMEN
Lack of libido
Headache soon after orgasm
INTRODUCTION
An enquiry about the sexual life of the patient should always form
part of the interrogation. This is not one of the traditional 10
942
questions from Chinese books, partly for cultural reasons. In fact,
starting from the Ming period and especially during the Qing
dynasty, Chinese medicine was heavily influenced by the prevalent
Confucian morality, which condemned any talk or display of
sexuality.
WHY
 
WE ASK
Questions about sexual symptoms are asked primarily to ascertain
the state of the Kidneys. In fact a Kidney deficiency is at the basis
of many sexual symptoms such as impotence, premature
ejaculation or frigidity.
In men, apart from asking about any sexual problems such as
impotence, it is important to establish whether any of their
symptoms is aggravated by sexual activity or if they feel excessively
tired after sexual activity. An aggravation of a symptom after sexual
activity always indicates a Qi deficiency, often of the Kidneys. A
Kidney deficiency is indicated also if a man feels especially tired
after sexual activity and particularly if the tiredness is
accompanied by dizziness, backache, weak knees, etc.
However, it should not be forgotten that other organs play a role
in the origin of sexual symptoms and particularly the Liver and the
Heart. The Heart, in particular, plays an important role in sexual
desire and in the achievement of a normal erection in men.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
I generally ask about sexual symptoms when the patient presents
with a clear Kidney- or Heart-deficiency pattern. I also ask about
sexual symptoms when the patient is clearly under emotional
stress and I suspect that this may be due to sexual problems such
as impotence in men or failure to achieve an orgasm in women.
HOW
 
WE ASK
For obvious reasons, the practitioner needs to be particularly
tactful when asking about sexual symptoms, especially when the
943
practitioner and patient are of the opposite sex. In some cases,
when I feel instinctively that the patient would not appreciate such
questions, I do not ask them.
An enquiry about sexual activity in men is important not only
for diagnostic reasons but also to be able to advise them about
appropriate levels of sexual activities according to Chinese
medicine.
 
1
 
There are significant differences between the sexual
physiology of men and of women that are not often taken into
account when advising patients about the desirable frequency of
sexual activity: the Chinese caution about ‘excessive sexual activity’
is more relevant to men than to women. In fact, the 
Tian Gui
 
, a
direct manifestation of Essence (
Jing
 
), is sperm in men and
menstrual blood in women: quite simply, because men lose sperm
but women do not obviously lose menstrual blood during
intercourse, sexual activity may potentially be weakening for men
(when it is too frequent) but not so much for women.
MEN
The sexual symptoms discussed are:
 
• 
 
Impotence
• 
 
Lack of libido
• 
 
Premature ejaculation
• 
 
Nocturnal emissions
• 
 
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation
(The symptoms and signs related to men’s sexual system are in
Chapter 75
 
of 
Part 5
 
.)
Impotence
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
Impotence is by far the most common sexual complaint in men
and the first cause that would come to mind would be a Kidney
deficiency and especially a Kidney-Yang deficiency. This is a
common cause of impotence, especially in older men, in which
944
case it is accompanied by a feeling of cold, backache, weak knees,
dizziness, tinnitus and poor memory, and abundant and clear
urine.
In young men, however, it is my experience that impotence is
more often related to a Heart pattern, such as Heart-Blood
deficiency or Heart-Fire, and anxiety. In a few cases, impotence
may also be caused by Damp-Heat in the Liver channel.
 
Impotence in young men is caused more frequently by
a Heart pattern than by a Kidney deficiency.
Box 45.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying male impotence.
 
BOX 45.1
 
   
 
IMPOTENCE
• 
 
Kidney (especially Kidney-Yang) deficiency:
impotence, feeling of cold, backache, abundant clear
urine, weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency: impotence, dizziness,
palpitations, Choppy pulse
• 
 
Heart-Fire: impotence, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, Rapid-Overflowing pulse
• 
 
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel: impotence,
heaviness of the scrotum, urethral discharge, sticky
yellow coating
Lack Of Libido
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
Lack of libido in men is usually related to a deficiency of Qi or
Yang, most frequently of the Kidneys; however, other organs may
be relevant and a severe Qi deficiency of such organs as Spleen,
Heart or Lungs may also cause lack of libido. In my experience, a
deficiency of the Heart is a more common cause of lack of libido
than deficiency of the Kidneys. Among Full conditions, Liver-Qi
stagnation may also cause lack of libido. Dampness in the Lower
945
Burner may also cause lack of libido.
Box 45.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying lack of libido in men.
 
BOX 45.2
 
   
 
LACK OF LIBIDO IN MEN
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Deficiency of Qi of the Heart, Lungs or Spleen
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Dampness
Premature Ejaculation
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
Premature ejaculation is usually related to a Kidney pattern and
Kidney-Qi especially may not be firm. It may also be due to a
Heart pattern such as Heart-Qi or Heart-Blood deficiency.
Box 45.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying premature ejaculation.
 
BOX 45.3
 
   
 
PREMATURE EJACULATION
• 
 
Kidney-Qi not firm
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Qi or Heart-Blood deficiency
Nocturnal Emissions
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
‘Nocturnal emissions’ indicates ejaculation during sleep; this
symptom always has ‘pride of place’ among Kidney-deficiency
symptoms in Chinese books. In the West, this symptom is
relatively rare and it is not even considered a ‘symptom’ unless it
occurs very frequently (e.g. once a week or more).
There are cultural reasons why this symptom always has a
prominent place among Kidney-deficiency symptoms in Chinese
books. In ancient times ejaculation during sleep, especially if with
sexual dreams, was considered to be due to the man having
946
intercourse with female ghosts at night; such ghosts were
considered very dangerous because they robbed men of their vital
Essence.
In general, nocturnal emissions without sexual dreams are due
purely to a deficiency (usually of the Kidneys), while nocturnal
emissions with sexual dreams are usually due to Heat (which may
be Full or Empty). Thus, Empty-Heat arising from a Kidney
deficiency may cause nocturnal emissions with dreams; Full-Heat,
particularly of the Liver or Heart, or both, may also cause this
symptom.
 
Nocturnal emissions without dreams are due to a
Kidney-Yin deficiency whereas nocturnal emissions
with dreams are due to Heat (Full or Empty).
Tiredness And Dizziness After Ejaculation
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 75
A pronounced feeling of tiredness and dizziness after
ejaculation is nearly always due to a deficiency of the Kidneys.
WOMEN
The sexual symptoms discussed are as follows:
 
• 
 
lack of libido
• 
 
headache soon after orgasm.
Lack Of Libido
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 89
Lack of libido or an inability to reach an orgasm in women is
usually related to a Kidney or Heart deficiency.
Generally, sexual desire depends on the state of Kidney-Yang
and the Minister Fire: a deficient Minister Fire may cause a lack of
sexual desire (and conversely, Fire of the Liver or Heart, or both,
947
and Empty-Heat deriving from Kidney-Yin deficiency may cause an
excessive sexual desire).
The Heart plays an important role in sexual arousal and orgasm
in women. During sexual arousal, there is an arousal of the
(physiological) Minister Fire of the Kidneys, which goes up
towards the Heart and Pericardium; it is this upward flow of the
Minister Fire towards the Heart that causes a flushed face and an
increased heart rate. Thus, a lack of sexual desire is often due to a
deficient Minister Fire and therefore Kidney-Yang.
During orgasm, the Minister Fire that was rising during sexual
arousal is suddenly discharged downwards; this downward
movement of the Minister Fire is controlled by the Heart (whose
Qi naturally descends). Hence an inability to reach an orgasm may
be due to a Heart deficiency.
Of course, a woman’s inability to reach an orgasm depends also
on the man’s performance during the 
sexual act. According to
Daoist sexual alchemy, men pertain to Fire and Fire flares up easily
and is easily extinguished; women pertain to Water and Water is
‘slow to boil and slow to cool down’. It is for this reason that the
ancient Daoist sex manuals were aimed primarily at men so that
they would be skilled in the art of sexual foreplay. Therefore, when
considering a woman’s inability to reach an orgasm we should
keep in mind the possibility that this is due to her partner’s lack of
skill rather than her own deficiency pattern.
Box 45.4
 
summarizes patterns underlying lack of libido in
women.
 
BOX 45.4
 
   
 
LACK OF LIBIDO IN
WOMEN
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency
Headache Soon After Orgasm
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 89
A headache soon after orgasm usually indicates rebellious Qi of
948
the Penetrating Vessel. It may also indicate Heart-Fire.
NOTES
1. 
See Maciocia, G. The Foundations of Chinese Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1998; 137–139.
949
CHAPTER 46
 
WOMEN’S
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY
BREAST SYMPTOMS
Breast lumps
Premenstrual breast distension
MENSTRUATION
Amount of bleeding
Colour
Consistency
Cycle
Menarche
Menopause
Pain
Premenstrual symptoms
950
Other symptoms occurring around menstruation
PREGNANCY AND CHILDBIRTH
Fertility
Miscarriage and abortion
Childbirth
Lactation
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
INTRODUCTION
 
WHY
 
WE ASK
In women patients, an enquiry about gynaecological symptoms is
absolutely essential, as such questions are often crucial to reach a
diagnosis in women, even for non-gynaecological problems. For
example, if a woman suffers from lower abdominal pain and we
are uncertain as to the cause, if her periods are painful and the
menstrual blood is dark and with clots this indicates conclusively
that the abdominal pain is due to Blood stasis.
WHEN
 
WE ASK
Unless a woman presents specifically with a gynaecological
complaint, I generally ask about her gynaecological history
towards the end of the consultation. An enquiry into the
gynaecological history even in postmenopausal women gives us an
idea of the general condition of Qi and Blood. For example, a
woman may have suffered throughout her life from heavy periods
that were caused by Blood-Heat; if she comes to us after the
menopause and we suspect that she might suffer from Blood-Heat
but we are uncertain because the symptoms are quite mild, an
enquiry into her menstrual history would help to confirm this
951
diagnosis.
HOW
 
WE ASK
When asking about a woman’s gynaecological history, we should
always start from the beginning by enquiring about the conditions
of her cycle 2 years after 
menarche (because it is common for the
cycle to be irregular for the first 2 years before it settles down).
We should ask systematically first about the actual menstrual
cycle and, secondly, about all other events in a woman’s
gynaecological history.
Regarding the menstrual cycle, we should ask about: the age of
menarche, the cycle, the amount of bleeding, the colour of
menstrual blood, and whether there are clots, pain, and any
premenstrual symptoms.
With regard to other gynaecological events, we should ask
specifically about: childbirth, abortion, miscarriage, use of
contraceptives (the Pill, uterine coil), or of hormone replacement
therapy, the presence of pelvic inflammatory disease, whether
there have been any gynaecological surgical interventions (such as
dilatation and curettage, laser treatment, hysteroscopy, colposcopy,
laparoscopy, etc.).
THE GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY
Women’s gynaecological history may sometimes be complicated;
for example, a woman may have used the contraceptive pill or the
coil for some years, or she may have had two children with
possibly one or more miscarriages or terminations in between. In
such cases, it is useful to draw a diagram illustrating clearly the
ages at which such events occurred. As an illustration, 
Figure 46.1
shows the gynaecological history of a woman whose menarche
occurred at 14 and who had an abortion at 18, a child at 24 and 28,
an ovarian cyst at 36 and the menopause at 52.
952
FIG. 46.1
 
Diagram of gynaecological history
If the woman’s cycle is irregular and characterized by discharges
or mid-cycle pain or discharge, it is also useful to draw a diagram
illustrating clearly at what part of the cycle such events take place.
As a way of illustration, 
Figure 46.2
 
shows the menstrual cycle of a
woman whose period lasts 7 days and who experiences mid-cycle
pain and premenstrual tension with breast distension.
FIG. 46.2
 
Diagram of menstrual cycle
Some women may complain of prolonged menstrual bleeding
whereas, in fact, they may suffer from mid-cycle bleeding. 
Case
history 46.1
 
illustrates this.
 
Case History 46.1
A 42-year-old woman complained of ‘almost constant
menstrual bleeding’. She said that her period would
last for 3 weeks and she would then have a week
without bleeding before the next period began.
However, on closer interrogation it emerged that what
she described as ‘bleeding’ was in fact a dark vaginal
discharge. The diagnostic interpretation and treatment
were therefore obviously different from what would be
suggested by prolonged bleeding.
953
Gynaecological events affecting diagnosis
Some gynaecological events (e.g. colposcopy) have a certain effect
on the woman’s physiology which we need to take into account
when diagnosing; others make diagnosing practically impossible,
(e.g. the Pill).
The answers to questions regarding regularity of cycle, amount
of bleeding, colour of menstrual blood, pain, etc., are unreliable if
the woman is on the Pill or has an intrauterine device. The Pill
regularizes the periods, makes them usually scanty and less
painful, and often prevents clotting; the intrauterine device
generally makes the periods heavier and more painful. In such
cases, it is important to ask the patient what her menstrual cycle
was like before she began using these forms of contraception.
BREAST SYMPTOMS
The breasts in women are influenced primarily by the Stomach
channel, which controls the main tissues of the breast and the
lactiferous ducts; the Liver channel influences the nipple but also,
together with the Gall-Bladder channel, the lateral side of the
breast. The Penetrating Vessel also influences the lactiferous ducts
and the connective tissues of the breast, which, in Chinese
medicine, would be classified as ‘Membranes’ (
Huang
 
). The
Muscle channels of the Gall-Bladder, Heart and Pericardium flow
over the breast. (See 
Fig. 46.3
 
and also 
Fig. 12.1 on p. 121
illustrating the channels coursing through the breast.)
954
FIG. 46.3
 
Organs influencing areas of the breast
The Penetrating Vessel originates from the Uterus and connects
with the breasts and this relationship can be seen in the linkage
that exists between menstrual blood and breast milk: breast milk
is a transformation of menstrual blood that occurs after childbirth
and the Penetrating Vessel, being the Sea of Blood, is therefore,
after childbirth, the source of breast milk. Many breast
pathologies, including breast lumps, especially in women over the
age of 40, nearly always occur against a background of
‘disharmony’ of the Penetrating Vessel, which means either a
deficiency or stasis of Blood in this vessel.
Breast Lumps
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 12
 
; 
Palpation
 
, 
Chapter 51
 
; 
Symptoms and
Signs
 
, 
Chapter 88
A common pathology of the breasts in women is the
955
development of lumps.
Relatively soft, movable, painless, multiple lumps with distinct
edges usually indicate fibrocystic disease, which, from the Chinese
point of view, is due to Phlegm.
A single, movable, relatively hard lump with distinct edges
usually indicates a fibroadenoma, which, from the Chinese point
of view, is due to a combination of Phlegm and Blood stasis.
A single, painless, immovable lump with indistinct edges may
indicate carcinoma of the breast which, from the Chinese point of
view, is usually due to a combination of Phlegm, Qi stagnation and
Blood stasis.
The age of the patient may give a rough indication of which is
the most likely of these three pathologies 
because fibroadenomas
are more common between the ages of 20 and 30, cysts between 30
and 50 and carcinoma from 50 onwards; of course, these are only
general statistical indications which always have exceptions in
practice.
Box 46.1
 
summarizes patterns underlying breast lumps.
 
BOX 46.1
 
   
 
BREAST LUMPS
Chinese medicine differentiation
• 
 
Relatively soft, movable, painless multiple lumps with
distinct edges: Phlegm
• 
 
Single, movable, relatively hard lump with distinct
edges: Phlegm with Blood stasis
• 
 
Single, not movable, relatively hard lump with
indistinct edges: Phlegm with Qi stagnation and Blood
stasis
Western medicine differentiation
• 
 
Soft, movable, painless, multiple lumps with distinct
edges: fibrocystic disease
• 
 
Single movable, relatively hard lump with distinct
edges: fibroadenoma
• 
 
Single, not movable, relatively hard lump with
indistinct edges: carcinoma
956
Premenstrual Breast Distension
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 12
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 88
One of the most common presenting breast symptoms is
premenstrual breast distension, which is a very typical sign of
Liver-Qi stagnation. Although Liver-Qi stagnation affecting the
breasts is a very common condition, stagnation of Lung-Qi also
has an important influence on the breasts in women. Emotional
problems such as sadness, grief and worry affect the Lungs and
may impair the circulation of Qi in the chest and therefore in the
breasts as well. For this reason, many breast pathologies in
women, including breast lumps, may be due to stagnation of
Lung-Qi rather than Liver-Qi and to the above-mentioned
emotions rather than anger or repressed anger. In particular, some
modern Chinese doctors relate breast pathologies to the emotional
stress deriving from separation such as widowhood, breaking up
of relationships, divorce, death of one’s children or bereavement at
a young age from the death of one’s spouse. Liver-Qi stagnation is
accompanied by irritability and a Wiry pulse, whereas in Lung-Qi
stagnation there is sadness and a Weak pulse.
If the breasts become also swollen, uncomfortable and
noticeably larger before the period, this also indicates also Liver-
Qi stagnation but combined with Phlegm, in which case the
tongue is swollen. If the breasts are distended and noticeably
painful before the periods, with a Purple tongue, this indicates
Liver-Blood stasis. A slight feeling of distension of the breasts after
the periods, with a Choppy pulse, is usually due to Liver-Blood
deficiency.
Case history 46.2
 
illustrates a pattern underlying breast
distension.
 
Case History 46.2
A 36-year-old woman had been suffering from
premenstrual swelling and pain of both breasts, but
worse on the left, with a lump on the edge of the left
breast which came up before the period and
disappeared afterwards. She had been suffering from
this problem for approximately 8 years. She suffered no
other menstrual irregularity as her periods came
957
regularly and were not too heavy or scanty and not
painful.
On interrogation, it transpired that she also suffered
from tiredness, floaters, weakness, dizziness,
palpitations, loose stools and anxiety in the evening.
Her tongue was slightly Pale and Swollen on the sides
and had a sticky coating. Her pulse was Fine and
slightly Wiry.
Diagnosis:
The breast pathology itself shows a clear condition of
Liver-Qi stagnation because the swelling of the breast is
clearly premenstrual; however, the breast lump, the
pronounced swelling and the pain indicate that there is
also Phlegm. This is Qi-Phlegm and the lump comes
and goes because of the Qi stagnation. Liver-Qi
stagnation occurs against a background of Liver-Blood
deficiency of which there are clear manifestations
(tiredness, floaters, dizziness, Pale sides of the tongue,
Fine pulse). There is also some Heart-Blood deficiency
indicated by the palpitations and the anxiety in the
evening. Finally, there is an underlying Spleen-Qi
deficiency indicated by the weakness and the loose
stools; the Spleen-Qi deficiency has given rise to
Phlegm.
Box 46.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying breast distension.
 
BOX 46.2
 
   
 
PREMENSTRUAL BREAST
DISTENSION
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation: pronounced distension,
irritability, Wiry pulse
• 
 
Lung-Qi stagnation: slight breast distension, sadness,
Weak pulse
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm: swollen and painful
breasts, Swollen tongue
958
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis: painful breasts, Purple tongue
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency: mild breast distension,
Choppy pulse
MENSTRUATION
When asking about menstruation, we should ask about the
following aspects systematically:
 
• 
 
amount of bleeding
• 
 
colour
• 
 
consistency
• 
 
cycle
• 
 
menarche
• 
 
menopause
• 
 
pain
• 
 
premenstrual symptoms
• 
 
other symptoms occurring around menstruation.
When asking questions about the menstrual cycle, I always ask
the woman how her periods were about 2 years after the menarche
(remember that it is normal for the period to be somewhat
irregular for 2 years after menarche). This is important because it
gives us an idea of the woman’s 
constitutional
 
menstrual cycle,
eliminating the influence of subsequent gynaecological events (e.g.
pregnancy, childbirth, miscarriage, abortion, contraception, etc).
For example, a woman may have suffered heavy blood loss
during childbirth and therefore develop a Blood deficiency which
makes her periods scanty. The scanty period in this case shows not
her constitutional menstrual cycle but the consequence of a
definite cause of disease. By asking her about her menstruation 2
years after menarche, we formulate an idea of the constitutional
state of her gynaecological system.
959
Amount Of Bleeding
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 84
The loss of blood during menstruation can vary between 30 and
80 ml. A period is defined as ‘heavy’ if the loss of blood is either
profuse or prolonged. It is important to ask how many days the
period lasts because a period that lasts more than 5 days is
normally considered excessive in Chinese medicine, while one that
lasts under 4 days is normally considered scanty. While most
women would describe as abnormal a period that either lasts too
long or is too heavy, they would not use the same term for a period
that is too short or too scanty. In other words, many women would
say that their period is ‘normal’ when it lasts 3 days or even less or
when the bleeding is very light.
A heavy loss of blood is due to Qi deficiency, Blood-Heat, Blood
Empty-Heat, Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency or Blood stasis. If
the period is scanty, this denotes Blood deficiency. Cold in the
Uterus or Liver-Blood stasis.
 
In my experience, there is strong bias among
practitioners to attribute heavy periods always to Qi
deficiency. This is not so and, in my experience, about
half the cases are due to Blood-Heat and half to Qi
deficiency.
Case history 46.3
 
illustrates a pattern underlying heavy periods.
 
Case History 46.3
A 42-year-old woman had been suffering from heavy
periods for 15 years: the periods came regularly, they
lasted 7 days, they were not painful and the menstrual
blood was dark with clots. The heaviest flow was in the
first 3 days of the period. A month before her
consultation a scan revealed the presence of fibroids in
the uterus.
Her body build was robust, her eyes had good lustre
indicating good Spirit and her general energy was good.
She was rather overweight and her complexion was
960
sallow. She had no other symptoms, apart from
occasionally mucus in the stools. Questions
investigating a possible Kidney deficiency revealed no
symptoms of it. On palpation, her abdomen felt quite
soft and the fibroids could not be palpated. Her tongue
had a normal colour but was very Swollen. Her pulse
was Slippery, Full and slightly Overflowing.
Diagnosis:
Her body build, the good Spirit and general energy
indicate a good constitution, although being overweight
indicates Phlegm. The presence of Phlegm is confirmed
by the presence of occasional mucus in the stools, her
being overweight, the swelling of the tongue and the
Slippery pulse; the fibroids could also be partly due to
Phlegm. The dark menstrual blood with clots and the
presence of the fibroids themselves indicates Blood
stasis localized in the Uterus and not severe enough to
turn the tongue Purple. In this case, we can therefore
conclude that the fibroids are due to a combination of
both Phlegm and Blood stasis; the softness of her
abdomen on palpation indicates that Phlegm is the
predominant pathogenic factor in the formation of the
fibroids.
The two major causes of heavy menstrual flow are
usually Qi deficiency or Blood-Heat and in this case it is
due to Blood-Heat; there are not many signs of this
because the tongue is not Red, but it is shown primarily
by the Overflowing pulse. On the other hand, there are
no signs of a Spleen or Kidney deficiency even though
the Spleen must be deficient for Phlegm to form. In her
case, there are probably not many symptoms of
deficiency because of her good constitution, which is
also shown by the Full pulse; this, while it does indicate
the presence of pathogenic factor also indicates that the
Upright Qi has not been severely affected.
In this case, it is necessary to treat her three main
conditions (i.e. Phlegm, Blood-Heat and Blood stasis)
961
simultaneously and the treatment principle is therefore
to resolve Phlegm, cool and invigorate Blood and stop
bleeding.
Box 46.3
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal amounts
of bleeding.
 
BOX 46.3
 
   
 
AMOUNT OF BLEEDING
Heavy
• 
 
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Blood-Heat
• 
 
Blood Empty-Heat
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis
Scanty
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Cold in the Uterus
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis
Colour
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 84
The colour of the menstrual blood varies slightly during the
period. In general, it is usually dark red, being lighter at the
beginning, deep red in the middle, and pinkish at the end of the
period. 
Box 46.4
 
summarizes the main areas of questioning and
patterns with regard to colour.
 
BOX 46.4
 
   
 
COLOUR OF MENSTRUAL
BLOOD
• 
 
Blood-Heat: dark red or bright red
• 
 
Blood deficiency: pale
• 
 
Stasis of Blood: blackish, very dark
962
• 
 
Full-Cold: purplish
• 
 
Empty-Cold: brownish like soya-bean sauce and dilute
• 
 
Empty-Heat in Blood: scarlet red
Consistency
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 84
The normal flow does not coagulate and there are no clots; the
blood is neither dilute nor thick. 
Box 46.5
 
summarizes the main
areas of questioning and patterns with regard to the consistency of
menstrual blood.
 
BOX 46.5
 
   
 
CONSISTENCY OF
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
• 
 
Stasis of Blood or Cold in the Uterus: clotted, with
dark, dull clots
• 
 
Heat: clotted, with dark but fresh-looking clots
• 
 
Stasis of Blood: large clots
• 
 
Cold in the Uterus: small dark clots, but blood not
dark
• 
 
Blood or Yin deficiency: watery
• 
 
Dampness or Damp-Heat in the Uterus: sticky
Cycle
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 84
The length of the cycle is ideally 28 days, but it may vary from
this norm. The regularity of the cycle is somewhat more important
than its absolute value; thus, if the cycle is consistently of 32 days,
this can be deemed normal and would not be considered as ‘late
periods’. Moreover, an occasional deviation from a regular cycle
should not be considered abnormal as the menstrual cycle is
influenced by many factors such as travelling, emotional stress,
etc.
There are several main areas of questioning with regard to the
963
cycle. Periods that are always early (i.e. more than 7 days early)
may be due to Qi deficiency, Blood-Heat or Empty-Heat in the
Blood from Blood or Yin deficiency. Periods that are always late (i.e.
more than 7 days late) may be due to Blood deficiency, stasis of
Blood or stasis of Cold. Periods that are irregular (sometimes late,
sometimes early) may be due to stagnation of Liver-Qi, stasis of
Liver-Blood, Spleen deficiency or Kidney deficiency. Periods that
stop and start, or that start or end with a brownish discharge, may
be due to Liver-Blood stasis. If there is mid-cycle bleeding then
this may be due to Damp-Heat, especially if there is also some
pain, Qi deficiency, or Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Amenorrhoea may be due to severe Blood deficiency (as often
happens in women athletes), Blood stasis or Cold in the Uterus.
Box 46.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying menstrual cycle
irregularites.
 
BOX 46.6
 
   
 
CYCLE IRREGULARITIES
• 
 
Always early: Qi deficiency, Blood-Heat, Blood Empty-
Heat, Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Always late: Blood deficiency, Liver-Blood stasis, Cold
in the Uterus
• 
 
Irregular: Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood stasis,
Spleen deficiency, Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Hesitant start: Liver-Blood stasis
• 
 
Starting or ending with brownish discharge: Liver-
Blood stasis
• 
 
Mid-cycle bleeding: Damp-Heat, Qi deficiency, Liver-
and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Amenorrhoea: severe Blood deficiency, Blood stasis,
Cold in the Uterus
Menarche
The age of menarche ranges between 10 and 16, with a mean at
12.8. Menarche tends to occur at a younger age in industrialized
countries compared with developing, agricultural societies.
Early menarche (i.e. before about 13) may indicate Blood-Heat,
964
whereas late menarche (after about 16) may indicate Blood or
Kidney deficiency, or both, or Cold in the Uterus.
Menopause
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 89
By menopause is meant the period of time during which levels
of oestrogen decline sharply, menstruation stops and a woman
becomes infertile. From the Chinese point of view, the menopause
is due to a natural, physiological decline of Kidney-Essence and it
is therefore not a gynaecological ‘disease’. It requires therapeutic
intervention only when the manifestations of this transitional
period become uncomfortable or distressing.
 
The menopause is 
not
 
a ‘disease’.
The main manifestations which usually bring a woman to seek
treatment are hot flushes, sweating and vaginal dryness. Strictly
speaking, these three are the only symptoms which are directly
related to a decline of hormone levels. However, many other
symptoms may appear owing to the decline of Kidney-Essence and
other allied patterns. These may be headaches, depression, anxiety,
irritability, crying, poor memory, clumsiness, insomnia, tiredness,
dry skin and hair.
It is a common misconception that menopausal symptoms are
always due to Kidney-Yin deficiency because they are characterized
by hot flushes. Although the hot flushes will obviously be more
intense if there is a Kidney-Yin deficiency, they also occur in
woman suffering from Kidney-Yang deficiency because, especially
during the menopausal years, a Kidney deficiency nearly always
includes a deficiency of both Yin and Yang. This very frequently
gives rise to contradictory hot and cold symptoms. For example, a
menopausal woman suffering from Kidney-Yin deficiency may
experience severe hot flushes, night sweating, dryness of the
vagina and skin, but she may also suffer from cold feet. Vice versa,
a menopausal woman suffering from Kidney-Yang deficiency may
experience cold feet and a cold feeling in general, frequent
965
urination but also hot flushes.
There are two other patterns associated with a Kidney deficiency
in the menopausal years which are particularly common; these are
Liver-Yang rising (causing headaches) and Heart-Yin deficiency
with Empty-Heat (causing insomnia, anxiety, agitation and poor
memory).
Finally, menopausal symptoms may be aggravated by pre-
existing patterns, the main one being Phlegm. This may aggravate
the hot flushes and also worsen the mental-emotional symptoms
associated with the menopause.
 
Menopausal symptoms occur against a background of
Kidney-Yang as often as Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Pain
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 84
Apart from a slight discomfort, normally the menstrual period
should be almost painless. The main areas of questioning with
regard to menstrual pain are as follows.
Time of pain
Pain before the period may be caused by stagnation of Qi or stasis
of Blood; the latter is typically relieved by the onset of the period.
Pain during the period is generally due to Blood-Heat or Blood
stasis. If there is pain 
after the period then this may be a result of
Blood deficiency.
Nature of pain
Severe, stabbing pain indicates a stasis of Blood. Severe, cramping
pain, which is eased by application of heat such as a hot-water
bottle, is caused by stasis of Cold.
A mild pain can indicate either Blood-Heat or deficiency of
Blood; a dragging feeling in the lower abdomen accompanying
mild pain is due to sinking of Qi. A feeling of heaviness in the
lower abdomen with pain, or pain on ovulation, may be caused by
Damp-Heat.
966
Case histories 46.4
 
–
46.6
 
illustrate some patterns underlying
menstrual pain.
 
Case History 46.4
A 15-year-old girl had been suffering from severe
abdominal pain for just over a year, beginning 18
months after menarche. The pain was on the right side
of her abdomen and she described it as a continuous,
dull ache. However, it would become sharp and
stabbing in nature during her period and also at other
times. The pain was relieved by the application of heat.
Three months before she came for treatment, the
patient had had an ovarian cyst removed from her left
side and one on her right side had been drained. She
had also had recurrent attacks of oral and genital ulcers
since the age of 9. These had been relieved by treatment
with steroids. On questioning, the patient revealed that
she was prone to constipation, specifically that she had
infrequent bowel actions.
Her tongue body was Swollen and slightly Red on the
sides. It had a white-sticky coating, particularly in the
Gall-Bladder area, and was peeled in the centre. Her
pulse was Wiry on the right and slightly Wiry on the
left, where it was also Empty at the Deep level.
Diagnosis:
The stabbing nature of the abdominal pain, together
with its alleviation by the application of heat, seems to
suggest Cold in the Uterus as the main cause. The
abdominal pain began shortly after menarche, which
also would suggest the presence of Cold in the Uterus
as this is a very common pathogenic factor in young
girls suffering from dysmenorrhoea. The Wiry quality
of the pulse seems also to confirm the presence of
stagnation. However, this initial hypothesis is not
confirmed by the other clinical manifestations.
Ovarian cysts are usually characterized by Dampness,
which is the case in this patient, as the presence of
Dampness is confirmed by the swelling of the tongue
967
and the sticky coating.
The recurrent oral and genital ulcers are caused by
Damp-Heat in the Girdle and Directing Vessels. A
disharmony of the Girdle Vessel is a frequent cause of
the accumulation of Dampness in the genital system,
especially in women: a disharmony of this Vessel is
confirmed by the distribution of the tongue coating in
the Gall-Bladder areas (
Fig. 46.4
 
) This disharmony of
the Directing Vessel is shown clearly by the distribution
of oral and genital ulcers as this vessel starts from Ren-
1, flows through the external genitalia and, on the face,
it wraps around the mouth. In this case, Dampness is
combined with Heat, which is evident from the redness
of the sides of the tongue.
FIG. 46.4
 
Patient’s tongue
Therefore, we can conclude that the abdominal pain
is caused by Damp-Heat and not by Cold as it would
appear on first impression. The long-standing retention
of Dampness in the Lower Burner (it started when she
was aged 9) also led to Qi and Blood stasis and
therefore the aggravation of the pain during the period.
From a Western medicine point of view, recurrent oral
and genital ulcers, which are inflammatory and non-
infectious, are known as Behçet’s disease.
968
The peeling of the central area of the tongue
indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency, which was probably
caused by Heat injuring Yin. The pulse being Empty at
the Deep level confirms the Yin deficiency; however, it
is Empty on the left side (rather than the right side as it
would be expected in Stomach-Yin deficiency) and this
may be due to a deficiency of Liver-Yin. This is all the
more likely owing to the disharmony of the Girdle
Vessel, which affects the Gall-Bladder and Liver
channels.
 
Case History 46.5
A 49-year-old woman had been suffering from
menstrual flooding for 11 years. Since the birth of her
second child, when she was 35, her cycle had been
irregular, varying in length between 17 and 45 days; the
period lasted 7 days in total, was painful, the menstrual
blood had clots and she had a brown discharge for 1
day after the period. Her periods had been painful also
in the years following the menarche at 12. Her
gynaecological history was rather complicated as she
had been on the contraceptive pill from the age of 18 to
30, she had a miscarriage at 30, the first child at 31,
another miscarriage at 34, a second child at 35 and the
periods became very heavy at 38. In complicated
histories such as these it is helpful to draw two
diagrams, one outlining the main gynaecological events
of her life and the other depicting the menstrual cycle
(
Figs 46.5
 
and 
46.6
 
).
969
FIG. 46.5
 
Diagram of gynaecological events
FIG. 46.6
 
Diagram of menstrual cycle
Apart from the gynaecological problem, she has also
had difficulty in controlling her bladder and also her
bowel since the second pregnancy.
Her pulse was slightly Overflowing and Rapid and
very Weak on both Rear positions; her tongue was Red
and slightly Purple.
Diagnosis:
The menstrual flooding is caused by Blood-Heat, which
is evidenced by the Red tongue and Overflowing-Rapid
pulse. There is also some Blood stasis indicated by the
painful period, menstrual clots, irregular cycle and
slightly Purple tongue. There is, thirdly, an underlying
Kidney deficiency, which is indicated by the weakness
of the pulse in both Rear positions and by the fact that
the menstrual flooding started after the second
childbirth and that she had two miscarriages.
The treatment principle is therefore to cool Blood,
stop bleeding, invigorate Blood and tonify the Kidneys.
In gynaecological problems, it is often appropriate to
apply different treatment principles in each phase of
the menstrual cycle. There are four phases in the
menstrual cycle, the first being the period itself during
which Blood is moving, the second being the
970
postmenstrual phase during which there is a relative
Blood deficiency, the third being ovulation during
which the Penetrating and Directing Vessels are active
and the fourth being the premenstrual phase during
which Liver-Qi moves. In this case, we can therefore
cool and invigorate Blood during the premenstrual
phase and the period itself and tonify the Kidneys after
the period for about 2 weeks.
 
Case History 46.6
A 28-year-old woman had been suffering from painful
periods ever since the menarche. The periods came
regularly and lasted 9 to 10 days; the menstrual blood
was dark with occasional clots. The pain was stabbing in
nature at times but at other times it was a dull, deep
ache rather than a pain and with a pronounced feeling
of heaviness: she said ‘my whole lower body feels thick,
heavy and stodgy’, which was clearly her way of
expressing what, in Chinese medicine, is called ‘a
feeling of heaviness’. The pain was situated in the
central-lower abdominal area and was alleviated by a
hot bath. Recently, she had been experiencing pain on
intercourse which was sharp in nature and also located
in the central-lower abdominal area. Apart from painful
periods, she had also been experiencing a dull, mid-
cycle ache on the right-lower abdominal area for the
past 2 years; this ache was also accompanied by a dark-
brown discharge. She also suffered from premenstrual
tension, manifesting with irritability and distension of
the breasts and abdomen. On the basis of an internal
examination and an ultrasound scan, she had been
diagnosed as suffering from endometriosis.
Other symptoms elicited from interrogation included
cold limbs, occasionally a feeling of heat in the face,
palpitations, anxiety and tightness of the chest.
971
The tongue was Red on the tip and the pulse was
slightly Slippery in general and slightly Tight on the left
rear position.
Diagnosis:
The stabbing character of the pain and the dark colour
of the menstrual blood with clots clearly indicates
Blood stasis which most probably derives from Cold in
the Uterus. We can deduce the presence of Cold in the
Uterus from the alleviation of the pain by a hot bath
and also by the history: in fact, if the periods are painful
from the time of menarche, the most common
aetiological factor is invasion of the Uterus by external
Cold owing to playing games wearing shorts in cold
and damp weather. In this case, therefore, Cold in the
Uterus obstructs the circulation of blood and causes
Blood stasis.
In addition to Blood stasis, there is also a clear
pattern of Dampness in the Lower Burner, which is
manifested by the occasional dull ache during the
periods, the pronounced feeling of heaviness and the
mid-cycle pain. There is also some Liver-Qi stagnation
causing the premenstrual symptoms.
An occasional feeling of heat in the face, cold limbs,
palpitations, anxiety and tightness of the chest can all
be explained as manifestations of rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel. In fact, given these symptoms and
the menstrual symptoms, we can say that all her
symptoms reflect a disharmony of the Penetrating
Vessel.
The main treatment principle is therefore simply to
regulate the Penetrating Vessel by warming the Uterus,
invigorating Blood and resolving Dampness from the
Lower Burner.
Box 46.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying menstrual pain.
972
 
BOX 46.7
 
   
 
MENSTRUAL PAIN
Time of pain
• 
 
Pain before the period: stagnation of Qi or stasis of
Blood (the latter is typically relieved by the onset of the
period)
• 
 
Pain during the period: Blood-Heat or Blood stasis
• 
 
Pain after the period: Blood deficiency
Nature of pain
• 
 
Severe, stabbing pain: stasis of Blood
• 
 
Severe, cramping pain, eased by application of heat
(such as a hot-water bottle): stasis of Cold
• 
 
Mild pain: Blood-Heat or deficiency of Blood
• 
 
Dragging feeling in the lower abdomen with mild
pain: sinking of Qi
• 
 
Feeling of heaviness in the lower abdomen with pain:
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Pain on ovulation: Damp-Heat
Premenstrual Symptoms
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 85
The most common cause of premenstrual tension is Liver-Qi
stagnation which manifests with irritability, depression and
moodiness, a tendency to crying, impatience and a Wiry pulse;
these emotional states are often accompanied by abdominal or
breast distension.
However, many other patterns may cause premenstrual tension.
Liver-Fire or Heart-Fire, or both, may cause premenstrual tension
manifesting with a propensity to outbursts of anger, irritability
and agitation, together with shouting, anxiety, insomnia and
dream-disturbed sleep. Phlegm-Fire harassing upwards may also
cause premenstrual tension manifesting with similar symptoms,
as well as mental confusion and hyperactivity; with Phlegm-Fire
there is also premenstrual breast swelling and pain.
973
Premenstrual tension may also be caused by Deficiency, and
primarily Liver-Blood deficiency, Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency,
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang 
deficiency, and Spleen-Qi deficiency with
Dampness. In Deficiency premenstrual tension manifests
primarily with depression, crying, lack of motivation, feelings of
heaviness, tiredness and lassitude, and only a mild irritability.
 
Premenstrual tension is 
not
 
always due to Liver-Qi
stagnation.
Nausea or vomiting before the period denotes stagnant Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach, whereas premenstrual constipation with
bitty stools and abdominal distension indicates stagnant Liver-Qi
invading the Intestines and Spleen. It is always important to ask
whether there is a change in bowel movements around period time
because such changes reflect the state of the Yang organs in a
woman. Loose stools or constipation are frequent symptoms
appearing at period time. Constipation at period time may be due
to stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Intestines, Liver-Blood deficiency
(with dry stools) or Kidney-Yang deficiency (with infrequent
movements), whereas loose stools may be due to Spleen-Qi
deficiency, stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Spleen (with abdominal
distension) or Kidney-Yang deficiency (with diarrhoea).
Headaches before the period indicate Liver-Qi stagnation or
Liver-Yang rising. Distension of the breasts denotes Liver-Qi
stagnation, but if the breasts become very swollen and painful this
may denote Phlegm (which, in premenstrual problems, usually
combines with Qi stagnation). Acute breast pain may be due to
Toxic Heat in the breast, such as happens in acute mastitis after
childbirth.
Retention of water with oedema before the period indicates
Spleen-Yang or Kidney-Yang deficiency, or both.
Box 46.8
 
summarizes patterns underlying premenstrual
symptoms.
 
BOX 46.8
 
   
 
PREMENSTRUAL
SYMPTOMS
974
• 
 
Irritability, depression, moodiness, propensity to
outbursts of anger/crying, abdominal/breast distension,
impatience, Wiry pulse: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Propensity to outbursts of anger, irritability, mental
restlessness, shouting, feeling of agitation, anxiety,
insomnia: Liver- and Heart-Fire
• 
 
Mental restlessness, anxiety, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep: Heart-Fire
• 
 
Mental restlessness, anxiety, insomnia, hyperactivity,
dream-disturbed sleep, mental confusion: Phlegm-Fire
harassing upwards
• 
 
Weepiness, crying, depression, mild irritability: Liver-
Blood deficiency with secondary Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Weepiness, crying, depression, lack of motivation,
insomnia: Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Weepiness, crying, depression, lack of motivation,
tiredness, lassitude: Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Weepiness, tiredness, lassitude, feeling of heaviness,
swollen breasts: Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
and secondary Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Nausea, vomiting: Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
• 
 
Constipation with bitty stools and abdominal
distension: Liver-Qi invading the Intestines
• 
 
Constipation with dry stools: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Constipation with infrequent bowel movement:
Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Loose stools: Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Loose stools with abdominal distension: stagnant
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
• 
 
Diarrhoea: Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Headaches, Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Breast distension and pain: Liver-Qi stagnation and/or
Phlegm
• 
 
Breast pain (acute): severe Liver-Qi stagnation or
Toxic Heat
• 
 
Oedema: Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
975
Other Symptoms Occurring Around
Menstruation
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 85
Headaches that occur during the period are usually due to Liver-
Yang rising or Liver-Fire blazing, occurring against a background
of Blood-Heat. Headaches occurring after the period indicate Liver-
Blood deficiency.
Constipation during the period may be due to Liver-Fire,
whereas constipation after the period is due to Blood or Kidney
deficiency.
Insomnia during the period indicates Blood-Heat, often with
Liver-Fire or Heart-Fire, or both. Insomnia after the period denotes
Blood deficiency.
Diarrhoea after the period indicates Spleen-Yang or Kidney-Yang
deficiency, or both.
Box 46.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying other
miscellaneous symptoms occurring around menstruation.
 
BOX 46.9
 
   
 
OTHER SYMPTOMS
OCCURRING AROUND
MENSTRUATION
• 
 
Headaches
— 
 
during the period: Liver-Yang rising or
Liver-Fire blazing
— 
 
after the period: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Constipation
— 
 
during the period: Liver-Fire
— 
 
after the period: Blood deficiency,
Kidney deficiency
• 
 
Insomnia
— 
 
during the period: Blood-heat, Liver-
Fire, Heart-Fire
— 
 
after the period: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Diarrhoea: Spleen/Kidney-Yang deficiency
976
PREGNANCY AND CHILDBIRTH
Fertility
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 86
 
and 
89
Infertility can be due to many different deficient or excess
conditions. These are:
 
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Kidney deficiency
• 
 
stasis of Blood
• 
 
Cold in the Uterus
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm.
A slight feeling of nausea in the first 3 months of pregnancy is
normal; persistent vomiting during the first 3 months of
pregnancy, or even continuing over the following months, is a
pathological sign which usually indicates rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating Vessel affecting the Stomach channel. This can occur
against a background of Stomach deficiency or Stomach-Heat.
Oedema during pregnancy indicates Kidney-Yang deficiency.
High blood pressure denotes a Kidney deficiency with Liver-Yang
rising: this may herald a pre-eclampsia state which is also
characterized by headache, dizziness and blurred vision. A full
eclampsia state manifests with convulsions which, from a Chinese
perspective, indicate the development of Liver-Wind from Liver
and Kidney deficiency.
An aggravation or an amelioration of certain symptoms by
pregnancy both indicate a Kidney deficiency. Most people think
that pregnancy is a weakening event in a woman’s life: in my
opinion this is not so and a pregnancy can be weakening only if
there is a pre-existing Kidney deficiency and the woman does not
look after herself. If any pre-existing Kidney deficiency is not very
severe and the woman looks after herself during pregnancy, this
event may actually strengthen the Kidneys (because menstruation
itself is moderately weakening and therefore its cessation can
increase Blood and strengthen the Kidneys). For this reason, an
977
aggravation of certain symptoms during pregnancy indicates that
the Kidneys have been weakened by it, while an amelioration
indicates that the Kidneys have been strengthened. Common
examples of diseases that may get better or worse during
pregnancy are asthma, migraine and rheumatoid arthritis.
 
Pregnancy is not necessarily-weakening to a woman’s
organism. It may have a neutral effect or it may even
have a strengthening effect.
Case histories 46.7
 
–
46.9
 
illustrate some patterns underlying
problems with fertility.
 
Case History 46.7
A 45-year-old woman had been trying to conceive for 7
years; she did have an 18-year-old child. Her periods
were scanty lasting only 2 or 3 days, she suffered from
premenstrual tension and from abdominal distension
after
 
the period; she also suffered from constipation
and a dragging feeling in the lower abdomen during
the periods. Other symptoms elicited from
interrogation included backache, occasional dizziness,
frequent urination and nocturia. She also suffered from
insomnia and anxiety. She was slightly overweight and
her eyes lacked sparkle to a severe degree.
She had seen a gynaecologist and had had various
tests and the Western medicine diagnosis was
endometriosis and ovarian cysts.
Her tongue was slightly Pale and, although it had a
sticky yellow coating in the centre and root, it was
Peeled on the sides and the front; her pulse was
Slippery in general, slightly Moving on the left Front
and Middle positions, Weak on both Rear positions and
Rapid (112 b.p.m.).
Diagnosis:
This patient presents with a complex picture of
patterns. There is definitely Dampness as evidenced by
978
her being overweight, the dragging feeling in the
abdomen, the sticky tongue coating and the Slippery
pulse. Dampness is associated with Heat because the
tongue coating is yellow. Another pattern is that of
Kidney deficiency, which is manifested by the backache,
dizziness, frequent urination, nocturia, scanty periods
and Weak pulse on both Rear positions.
The lack of sparkle in the eyes and the Moving and
Rapid pulse suggest the presence of a Heart pattern,
which is probably due to shock. This is confirmed by
the insomnia and the anxiety; the tongue is slightly Pale
but also Peeled in the front and we can therefore
conclude that there is deficiency of both Qi and Yin of
the Heart. The premenstrual tension indicates Liver-Qi
stagnation but this is not a major problem in this case
as it is secondary to the Kidney deficiency; this is
confirmed by the fact that abdominal distension occurs
after rather than before the period.
 
Case History 46.8
A 39-year-old woman had suffered from excessive body
hair since the onset of puberty at the age of 15. She had
recently been diagnosed with polycystic ovary
syndrome after an ultrasound scan. Her menstrual cycle
was 5 weeks long, the period lasted 5-6 days and she
had a white, jelly-like vaginal discharge at mid-cycle.
She often felt tired and her sleep was not good,
regularly waking up early in the morning. She had a
tendency towards constipation and suffered from
haemorrhoids. Her hands and feet were often cold. Her
mouth tended to be dry and she had catarrh in her
throat.
The tongue was Swollen with Red sides and red
points on the tip and with a sticky yellow coating. The
pulse was Deep-Weak and Slow (60 b.p.m.) overall, the
979
right Front and left Rear positions being especially
Weak.
Diagnosis:
Excessive body hair and polycystic ovary syndrome
often go hand in hand and, in this case, are caused by
Phlegm, which has developed as a result of an
underlying Kidney-Yang deficiency. While in Western
medicine the excessive growth of body hair is explained
by an imbalance between oestrogen and testosterone
(with excessive levels of the latter), in Chinese medicine
it is due to a disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel: the
Penetrating Vessel is the Sea of Blood and a disharmony
may cause the Blood to promote the growth of body
hair excessively. The Penetrating Vessel disharmony is
also indicated by the onset of the problem at puberty,
which is a time when the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels are in a state of transition and change and are
therefore susceptible to disharmonies.
The presence of Phlegm is confirmed by the Swollen
tongue, the mid-cycle vaginal discharge and the ovarian
cysts themselves. The symptoms of tiredness,
constipation and cold extremities are due to the Kidney-
Yang deficiency, which is shown by the pulse being
Deep-Weak and Slow, especially in the left Rear
position.
The swelling and the redness of the sides of the
tongue body, the sticky-yellow tongue coating and the
red points on the tip indicate Phlegm-Heat affecting
probably the Lungs and Heart, but she has hardly any
symptoms of this apart from the dry mouth and the
phlegm in the throat.
 
Case History 46.9
A 41-year-old woman had been trying to conceive for
over a year without success. During that year she did
980
become pregnant once, but the pregnancy was ectopic
and she had to have her right tube removed. She had
already had a child two and a half years previously. She
also complained of feeling tired, exhausted, with low
motivation and lack of libido. Her sleep was disturbed
and she occasionally experienced floaters and night
sweating.
Her periods were quite normal, being regular, lasting
5 days and being not too heavy or too scanty and not
painful. She had a past history of abdominal pain
caused by pelvic inflammatory disease, causing
dyspareunia (pain on intercourse) which had improved
with acupuncture.
Her tongue was practically normal, being only very
slightly Pale on the sides and with a slightly Red tip
with red points. Her pulse was Wiry in general and
slightly Slippery and noticeably Full at the Middle level.
Diagnosis:
This case history is presented here as an example of the
importance of the pulse in diagnosis. On first analysis,
it would appear that this patient suffers from a Kidney
deficiency which is causing her to be infertile, tired,
exhausted, lacking in motivation and libido. However,
further questioning aimed at confirming or excluding
the Kidney deficiency did not reveal any backache,
dizziness or tinnitus. Moreover, she did conceive once
resulting in an ectopic pregnancy, which normally
indicates an obstruction of the Lower Burner from
Dampness, Phlegm, stagnation of Qi or stasis of Blood;
therefore, if she is infertile, it is probably more from a
Full condition than from a Kidney deficiency.
Furthermore, the pulse and the tongue do not show a
deficiency of the Kidneys or any other organ.
The Wiry pulse clearly indicates severe stagnation of
Qi, probably deriving from emotional problems, which
is confirmed by the Red tip with red points on the
tongue. Therefore we can conclude that her exhaustion,
981
lack of motivation and lack of libido are due more to
mental depression than to a Kidney deficiency.
Moreover, the Full quality of the Middle level of the
pulse (corresponding to Blood) confirms a condition of
Blood stasis in the Uterus. Her past history of pelvic
inflammatory disease and dyspareunia confirms this
diagnosis.
The treatment principle in this case therefore should
be to move Qi, pacify the Liver, invigorate Blood and
calm the Mind.
Miscarriage And Abortion
It is important to ask about miscarriages and abortion as they
weaken a woman’s body. There is a saying in Chinese gynaecology
that states: ‘Miscarriage is more serious than childbirth.’ It is easy
to understand why this should be so: during a miscarriage there is
a heavy loss of blood; moreover, from a mental-emotional point of
view, it means a great loss to the woman with ensuing sadness and
grief, which are often underestimated.
Abortion is also weakening but to a lesser degree because there
is not the loss of blood that occurs during a spontaneous
miscarriage.
Miscarriage before 3 months indicates a Kidney deficiency,
whereas miscarriage after 3 months denotes sinking of Spleen-Qi,
Liver-Blood stasis or Blood-Heat.
Childbirth
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 87
There are several main areas of questioning with regard to the
conditions of labour. Nausea and heavy bleeding after labour may
be caused by exhaustion of the Penetrating Vessel. Sweating with
fever after labour is due to exhaustion of Qi and Blood.
Postnatal depression is caused by Liver-Blood and Heart-Blood
deficiency. Postnatal psychosis indicates a stasis of Blood in the
982
Uterus and Heart.
Lactation
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 87
Breast milk not flowing (agalactia) after childbirth may be due to
Blood deficiency, Stomach and Spleen deficiency or Liver-Qi
stagnation. Spontaneous flow of milk after childbirth may be due
to Spleen-Qi deficiency, Stomach-Heat or Liver-Fire.
Mastitis after childbirth is due to Toxic Heat in the Stomach
channel.
Box 46.10
 
summarizes patterns underlying pregnancy- and
childbirth-related problems.
 
BOX 46.10
 
   
 
PREGNANCY AND
CHILDBIRTH
Fertility and pregnancy
• 
 
Infertility: Blood deficiency, Kidney deficiency, Blood
stasis, Cold in the Uterus, Damp-Phlegm
• 
 
Severe morning sickness: rebellious Qi of the
Penetrating Vessel, Stomach deficiency or Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Oedema during pregnancy: Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
High blood pressure during pregnancy: Kidney
deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
• 
 
Eclampsia: Liver-Wind
• 
 
Miscarriage:
— 
 
before 3 months: Kidney deficiency
— 
 
after 3 months: sinking of Spleen-Qi,
Liver-Blood stasis, Blood-Heat
Childbirth and lactation
• 
 
Nausea and heavy bleeding: exhaustion of the
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Sweating and fever after labour: exhaustion of Qi and
Blood
• 
 
Postnatal depression: Liver-Blood and Heart-Blood
deficiency
983
• 
 
Postnatal psychosis: stasis of Blood in the Uterus and
Heart
• 
 
Agalactia: Blood deficiency, Stomach and Spleen
deficiency, Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Spontaneous milk flow: Spleen-Qi deficiency,
Stomach-Heat, Liver-Fire
• 
 
Mastitis: Toxic Heat in Stomach channel
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Hearing and Smelling
 
, 
Chapter 54
 
;
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 89
By ‘vaginal discharge’ is meant an abnormal discharge and not
the normal transparent, egg-white-like secretion occurring during
ovulation. Vaginal discharge must be differentiated according to
colour, consistency and smell. An increase in vaginal secretions
mid-cycle and during pregnancy is normal.
Box 46.11
 
summarizes patterns underlying abnormal vaginal
discharge.
 
BOX 46.11
 
   
 
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Colour
• 
 
White: Cold from Spleen- or Kidney-Yang deficiency
or from exterior Cold-Dampness
• 
 
Yellow: Heat, usually Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
• 
 
Greenish: Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
• 
 
Red and white: Damp-Heat
• 
 
Yellow, red with white pus after menopause: Toxic
Heat
Consistency
• 
 
Watery: Cold-Dampness, Deficiency condition
• 
 
Thick: Damp-Heat, Excess condition
Smell
• 
 
Fishy: Cold
984
• 
 
Leathery: Heat
985
CHAPTER 47
 
CHILDREN’S
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
MOTHER’s pregnancy
CHILDBIRTH
POSTPARTUM PROBLEMS
CHILDHOOD DISEASES
DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
IMMUNIZATIONS
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND EARACHE
Coughs and wheezing
Earache
Chronic catarrh
SLEEP
SLOW DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
986
The interrogation of children, especially young children, obviously
needs to be carried out with the help of the child’s parents or other
relatives. In older children (over the age of 5 years), although we
still need the help of the parents in describing the child’s
symptoms and signs, it is important to listen carefully to the child
as well. When asking children about their symptoms, we should
obviously avoid the use of difficult medical terms such as
‘abdomen’ and use colloquial terms such as ‘tummy’.
Most of the questions related to adults discussed in the previous
chapters apply to children as well (e.g. digestive system and taste,
thirst, defecation, urination, etc.). There are, however, several
questions which pertain only to children and these are the
mother’s pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum problems,
immunizations and childhood diseases. In addition to the above
areas of questioning, questions about the child’s digestive system,
respiratory symptoms, earache, and sleep are also important and
have a slightly different significance to that in adults.
MOTHER’S PREGNANCY
The period in the womb is extremely important in influencing the
constitution of the baby. Many factors affect the baby and its
constitution in the gestation period. Emotional shocks to the
mother can affect the child’s nervous system and the Heart. The
consumption of alcohol and recreational drugs and smoking
obviously affect the child’s constitution adversely.
When a baby cries a lot at night and vomits frequently, this may
be due to what the Chinese called 
‘womb Heat’, which itself may
be due either to the pregnant mother’s consumption of excessively
hot foods or, more commonly, to her suffering from shock during
pregnancy. Prenatal shock may also manifest with a bluish tinge on
the baby’s forehead and chin.
The influence of pregnancy events on the baby’s health is
discussed also in 
Chapter 48
 
.
CHILDBIRTH
The conditions of childbirth also have an important influence on
987
the baby’s constitution. Premature cutting of the umbilical cord,
induction or a Caesarean birth can all affect the baby’s constitution
adversely and in particular may cause a Lung deficiency. Therefore
if a baby or very young child suffers from a Lung deficiency, this
may be due to the above mentioned conditions in childbirth.
POSTPARTUM PROBLEMS
The main question to ask is about breast feeding: lack of breast
feeding or too short breast feeding often adversely affects a baby’s
digestive system causing either a Stomach deficiency or retention
of food in the Stomach. Giving solid food to babies too early
(before 6 months of age) is a very common cause of retention of
food in babies and children.
CHILDHOOD DISEASES
We should always ask parents about their child’s childhood
diseases. A history of several childhood diseases with rashes (e.g.
measles, chickenpox, German measles) suggests the child’s
tendency to Heat. Whooping cough has a weakening effect on the
child’s lungs and this may cause a weak Lung constitution and the
tendency to develop Lung patterns later in life.
DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
Digestive symptoms are very common in children owing to the
Stomach and Spleen being inherently weak at birth; the younger
the child, the more common are digestive symptoms. The two
most common causes of abdominal pain in children are retention
of Cold in the Stomach and Intestines and stagnation of Qi in the
Intestines. In babies, retention of food (called Accumulation
Disorder in babies) is very common and it manifests with vomiting
of milk and with colic.
988
IMMUNIZATIONS
A full discussion on immunizations is beyond the scope of this
book. To understand the effect of immunizations from a Chinese
perspective it is necessary to refer to the theory of the Four Levels
(see 
Part 6
 
). When a pathogenic factor invades the body, it enters
the Defensive-Qi level first and, if not expelled, progresses
through the Qi, Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels. The Four Levels
represent four different energetic layers of penetration of Heat, the
Defensive-Qi level being the most superficial and the Blood level
the deepest.
From a Chinese perspective, therefore, immunizations basically
consist in injecting a ‘pathogenic factor’ (i.e. the live or attenuated
germ) directly at the Blood level. This may cause Latent Heat to
develop at the Blood level, which may cause problems to the child
both in the short term and in the long term.
In the short term, Latent Heat may cause a skin rash, insomnia
and a temporary change in the child’s character. The long-term
effects of immunizations are more difficult to establish and are the
subject of great controversy. However, if immunizations lead to
Latent Heat at the Blood level, it is quite possible that they may
have serious long-term effects. These include brain damage,
possibly autism, asthma, chronic cough, allergies and skin
diseases later in life.
The effect of immunizations from the Chinese perspective is
discussed also in 
Chapter 48
 
.
 
Immunizations are a common cause of Latent Heat in
children, which may persist into adulthood.
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND
EARACHE
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
Questions concerning cough, wheezing, breathlessness or
earache are always important in the child’s 
interrogation because
989
children are very prone to invasions of Wind, which may cause the
above symptoms.
Coughs And Wheezing
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
A history of repeated bouts of cough and wheezing nearly
always indicates a residual pathogenic factor (usually Lung
Phlegm-Heat) following invasions of external Wind. These give rise
to a residual pathogenic factor when the Wind is not cleared
properly, when antibiotics are used too frequently or when the
child has a weak constitution. In such cases the child will suffer
from a chronic cough or wheezing, or both, and will be prone to
frequent respiratory infections.
Earache
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
A history of chronic earache also indicates the presence of a
residual pathogenic factor, which, in this case, is usually Damp-
Heat in the Gall-Bladder channel. This is also the result of
frequent, acute ear infections usually treated by the repeated
administration of antibiotics, which only makes matters worse by
promoting the development of a residual pathogenic factor.
 
BOX 47.1
 
   
 
INFLUENCES ON CHILDREN
AND CHILDREN’s SYMPTOMS
• 
 
Mother’s pregnancy: ‘womb Heat’, prenatal shock
• 
 
Childbirth: Lung deficiency
• 
 
Postpartum problems: Stomach deficiency, retention
of food in the Stomach
• 
 
Childhood diseases: rashes (tendency to Heat), weak
Lung constitution after whooping cough
• 
 
Digestive symptoms: retention of Cold in Stomach
and Intestines, stagnation of Qi in Intestines,
Accumulation Disorder
• 
 
Cough and wheezing: invasions of Wind, residual
pathogenic factor
• 
 
Earache: residual pathogenic factor, usually Damp-
990
Heat in Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Chronic catarrh: Phlegm
• 
 
Disturbed sleep: retention of food and Stomach-Heat
(babies), Liver-Fire, Stomach-Heat or retention of food
(older children)
• 
 
Immunizations: Latent Heat
• 
 
Slow development (Five Retardations): congenital
weakness of Liver, Kidney, Stomach, Heart
Chronic Catarrh
The condition of chronic catarrh is very common in children and
this is the consequence of a residual pathogenic factor after
repeated invasions of Wind combined with a Spleen deficiency,
leading to the formation of Phlegm. A child with this condition
will have a constantly runny nose or a blocked nose, cough and
glue ear.
SLEEP
We should always ask about sleep in babies and children because
not only does it give us an indication of the state of the Mind but
also a disturbance of sleep often reflects the presence of certain
pathogenic factors.
Disturbed sleep with crying in babies is often due to retention of
food and Stomach-Heat, in which case the baby will cry out loudly.
If the baby cries relatively quietly during the night, it may be due
to a prenatal shock.
Disturbed sleep in older children may be due to the same
factors as in adults but the most common ones are Liver-Fire,
Stomach-Heat and retention of food.
SLOW DEVELOPMENT
Slow development in children was summarized in ancient China as
the ‘Five Retardations’. These consist in slow development in
991
standing, walking, teeth growth, hair growth and speech.
Slow development is caused primarily by congenital weakness of
the Liver and Kidneys with the Kidneys affecting standing, teeth
growth and hair growth and the Liver affecting standing and
walking. Among postnatal causes, the Stomach influences walking
and the Heart speech. 
Figure 47.1
 
illustrates the influence of
prenatal and postnatal deficiencies on the Five Retardations.
FIG. 47.1
 
Prenatal and postnatal conditions affecting the Five
Retardations
992
CHAPTER 48
 
DIAGNOSING
THE CAUSES OF
DISEASE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CAUSES OF DISEASE
Interaction of trauma with climate
Interaction of hereditary weak constitution with
diet
Interaction of emotional problems at puberty
with overwork
Interaction of weak Heart constitution and
emotional problems
THE FIVE STAGES OF LIFE
Childhood
Adolescence
Young adulthood
993
Middle age
Old age
THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
Heredity
Emotions
Overwork
Diet
Climate
Trauma
Drugs including immunizations
Excessive sexual activity
INTRODUCTION
As mentioned earlier, the identification of the possible causes of
patients’ disharmony is linked to general enquiries about their
emotional life, working life, diet, past history of shocks or traumas,
family history and environmental influences. I usually begin by
carrying out a specific interrogation to identify the patterns of
disharmony 
before
 
delving into these aspects of a patient’s life. It is
important not to confuse the general interrogation to find the
causes
 
of disease with the specific interrogation to identify the
patterns
 
of disharmony.
Identifying the causes of disease is not easy and therefore not
always possible, but to try to do so is important as it is only by
finding the causes of disease that we can help the patient to
eliminate or minimize them if at all possible. Even if the patient
can do nothing about a particular cause that is rooted in the past
(such as an earlier accident), its identification is still important in
order that we may channel our advice to the patient along the right
lines. For example, there is no point in delving deeply into a
patient’s emotional life if the cause of the problem is a past
994
accident; vice versa, there is no point in tinkering with a patient’s
diet or suggesting strict dietary prohibitions if the cause of the
problem is clearly emotional.
One of the strengths of Chinese medicine, when compared with
some branches of modern complementary medicine that consider
a particular cause of disease to the exclusion of all others, is
precisely that it contemplates many different causes of disease
without a particular emphasis on one or another.
Traditionally the causes of disease were differentiated according
to three broad categories: external (due to climate), internal (due
to emotions), and 
miscellaneous. Nowadays, this classification is
no longer relevant (not least because some of the most important
causes of disease are in the ‘miscellaneous’ group) and we need
not follow it. The main causes of disease, listed in approximate
order of their importance and frequency are:
 
• 
 
heredity
• 
 
emotions
• 
 
overwork
• 
 
diet
• 
 
climate
• 
 
trauma
• 
 
drugs including immunizations
• 
 
‘recreational’ drugs
• 
 
excessive sexual activity.
I find that, when identifying a cause or causes of disease, it is
helpful to divide a person’s life into five distinct ages (see below).
Because each cause of disease is more prevalent during a certain
period of life, establishing when the cause arose helps us to
identify the disease. There seldom is only one cause of disease;
nearly always a disease results from the combination of at least
two causes. Usually one cause occurs at a certain point of the
patient’s life, then, some years later, another cause intervenes and
the combination of the two triggers a disharmony (
Fig. 48.1
 
).
Some examples will be given below.
995
FIG. 48.1
 
Interaction of causes of disease: (a) trauma followed by
external invasion; (b) poor diet, childbirth problems followed by
emotional problems
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CAUSES
OF DISEASE
Interaction Of Trauma With Climate
A trauma to a knee that occurred at a young age when the patient
was playing sports may heal without any apparent consequence
but when, years later, the patient is then subject to invasion of
Cold and Dampness (when he goes out walking in the rain and
remains in wet clothes for the whole day), he may develop Painful
Obstruction Syndrome in that knee. A previous trauma, in fact,
often explains the unilaterality of a particular joint problem.
Interaction Of Hereditary Weak Constitution
With Diet
A girl is born with a weak Stomach and Spleen constitution, which
appears to improve after the age of 7, as often happens. When the
girl reaches 14 she becomes a vegetarian. Her diet now consists
mainly of cheese and salads; this interacts with the pre-existing
weak Stomach and Spleen constitution to cause Spleen-Qi
deficiency and possibly also Blood deficiency.
996
Interaction Of Emotional Problems At
Puberty And Overwork
A girl suffers deep emotional traumas around the time of puberty,
owing to family conflicts. These have no apparent effect until she
is an older woman. At the age 
of 27 she is working very hard and
for very long hours; the emotional problems at puberty (which
affect the Directing and Penetrating vessels) interact with the
overwork later in life to cause gynaecological problems, possibly
endometriosis.
Interaction Of Weak Heart Constitution And
Emotional Problems
A child is born with a weak Heart constitution manifesting with a
nervous disposition, restlessness in sleep and a deep Heart crack
on the tongue. At a later age, the young man suffers deep
emotional stress owing to relationship difficulties; the interaction
of a pre- existing weak Heart constitution and the subsequent
emotional problems causes serious Heart patterns and possibly
severe anxiety and depression.
THE FIVE STAGES OF LIFE
The patient’s life can be differentiated into five stages:
 
• 
 
childhood (from birth to puberty)
• 
 
adolescence (from puberty to about 20 years)
• 
 
young adulthood (from 20 to 40)
• 
 
middle age (from 40 to 60)
• 
 
old age (from 60 onwards).
Of course, the above age limits are intended only as a guideline
and individual cases may differ from them according to individual
body conditions. For example, a 38-year-old person who is in very
poor health could be included in the middle-aged group, whereas
997
a youthful and healthy 42-year-old person could be included in the
young adulthood age. The following are the main characteristics
and possible aetiology and pathology of these five ages.
Childhood
During early childhood there are only three possible causes of
disease, that is, weak hereditary constitution, irregular feeding and
climate. Therefore, if a patient has been suffering from a particular
complaint since early childhood, this can be due to one of these
three causes. We can eliminate climate as a cause because it does
not usually cause long-lasting consequences (unless there is a
residual pathogenic factor), so the problem can therefore be due
only to heredity or irregular feeding. An example of such a
problem is early-onset atopic disease (asthma and eczema), which
is usually due to a hereditary weakness of the Lungs’ and Kidneys’
Defensive-Qi systems.
A new possible cause of disease in young children is
immunizations, which are often the cause of chronic infections,
sleep problems or hyperactivity.
Older children’s main causes of disease are primarily diet,
climate, emotions and traumas. For example, if a patient has been
suffering from persistent headaches since childhood, this could be
due either to a trauma to the head or to irregular diet as a child.
The emotional life of a child is quite different from that of an adult
and a child’s emotional problems are largely the reflection of the
family’s emotional state.
Adolescence
Adolescence is a very vulnerable period of life both on a physical
and on an emotional level, especially for girls. Taking a careful
history will often reveal the onset of a particular problem during
adolescence. For example, if a girl has been suffering from
headaches since the onset of the menarche (which can be
established only with very careful questioning) this most probably
indicates Liver-Blood deficiency (resulting in Liver-Yang rising) as
the main cause of the problem. This, in turn, is most probably due
to dietary irregularity or an injudicious vegetarian diet.
998
Skin problems from this age may also be due to the aggravation
of Blood deficiency with the onset of the menarche. If a young
woman has been suffering from painful periods ever since their
onset, this almost certainly points to invasion of Cold in the Uterus
during early adolescence when the Uterus is in a particularly
vulnerable state.
Adolescence is also a vulnerable time from the emotional point
of view and deep emotional problems in a young adult often stem
from that time.
Young Adulthood
Many events characterize the early young adulthood, for example
leaving home, change of diet, sexual activity, and infections.
Leaving home often coincides with a deterioration in the young
person’s dietary habits characterized by irregular meals, eating
‘fast foods’, and often becoming vegetarian. When practised
without a proper understanding 
of nutrition, a vegetarian diet may
lead to Blood deficiency, especially in girls. Therefore, digestive
problems later in life often have their root in the early 20s.
Young adulthood is also the time of emotional stress deriving
from work, relationships and unresolved family situations. The
pulse reflects the emotional cause of disease quite accurately. For
example, if the Lung pulse is somewhat full and the patient looks
sad, it may be due to sadness or grief which has not been
expressed (the fullness of the Lung pulse would indicate this). If
the Lung pulse is particularly Weak and without wave and the eyes
lack lustre, I may enquire whether events in the patient’s life have
caused sadness or grief.
If the Heart pulse is Overflowing and there is a Heart crack on
the tongue, I may ask if the patient has suffered from a shock. If
the Heart pulse is Choppy, the complexion dull, the eyes lustreless
and the voice weak and weepy, it often indicates long-standing
sadness.
If the pulse is Wiry on all positions, I may enquire whether there
is some situation in the patient’s life that is causing frustration,
anger or resentment.
The pulse, complexion and eyes often point to the true emotion
999
underlying the disease, sometimes even contradicting the patient’s
own perception. For example, a patient complained of various
symptoms which she attributed to the anger she felt at having
suffered sexual abuse as a teenager. Her therapist had also
identified anger as a cause of her symptoms. However, her very
pale complexion, sad eyes and Weak pulse without wave, especially
on the Lung position, showed a different picture; in other words,
all the signs pointed to sadness and grief as the predominant
emotions. I therefore asked her how she felt about her past
experiences and she confirmed that those were the predominant
emotions.
Another case showed almost the opposite situation. A young
woman complained of premenstrual tension and depression; she
looked quite sad and her voice was somewhat weepy. However, her
pulse was not weak but somewhat full; in particular, it was Moving,
especially on the Heart position. I asked her if she had suffered a
shock during childhood and she burst into tears, telling me about
sexual abuse suffered from an uncle.
Middle Age
The main causes of disease in middle age are emotions, overwork
and diet.
The emotional state of middle age may take two opposite
directions: some people have been able to resolve the emotional
problems of their youth and have settled into a way of life that
pays attention to the needs of the Self; for others, middle age is a
time of crisis and emotional turmoil when every aspect of their life
is questioned. Most people overcome this crisis to achieve a better
emotional balance.
Overwork is probably the most important cause of disease in
middle age. This comes about because middle age is a time when
people usually reach the peak of their profession, which imposes
the heaviest demands. Unfortunately, this comes at a time when
our energy is naturally declining and Kidney-Qi begins to decline
too. Most people make unreasonable demands on their own
bodies; they expect their energy to be the same as when they were
in their 30s or even 20s, and have no idea about the need for rest;
1000
they think it is ‘normal’ to get up at 6.30 in the morning, catch a
train at 7.30, work all day under conditions of stress, eat a
sandwich at their desk for lunch without any interruption from
work, and return home at 9 in the evening. This constitutes
‘overwork’ and is a major cause of Kidney deficiency in the
Western world.
Old Age
Old age is a time when causes of disease have a lesser impact than
in any other period of life. Generally speaking, past causes of
disease are already well entrenched and usually no new causes of
disease play a role. This is not because diet or emotional problems
do not affect the elderly but because any cause of disease at this
time of one’s life inevitably has its roots in the distant past; for this
reason, a change in habits is somewhat less important in the
elderly than at any other time of life, particularly with regard to
diet. For example, if an 85-year-old man suffers from Phlegm due
to a lifelong excessive consumption of greasy foods, a change in
diet at this late time of life will have little impact on his organism
(although it may still be advisable for him to make these changes).
Of course, that is not to say that other changes in life’s habits do
not have an impact on a person’s health: for example, it is never
too late to explore the root of one’s emotional problems or to take
up exercise.
THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
Heredity
The constitutional body condition inherited from our parents
depends on three factors:
 
1. 
 
The parents’ health in general
2. 
 
The parents’ health at the time of conception
3. 
 
The conditions of the mother’s pregnancy.
1001
Any of these factors can affect the body condition and become a
cause of disease later in life. If the parents’ Qi and Essence are
weak, the child’s resulting Pre-Heaven Essence will also be weak.
Similarly, if the mother conceives in later life, this can result in a
Kidney or Liver deficiency starting during childhood.
Even though the parents’ general health may be good, if it is
poor at the time of the child’s conception (perhaps through
overwork, excessive sexual activity, excessive consumption of
alcohol, or use of certain medications or drugs such as cannabis or
cocaine), this will result in the child’s having a weak constitution.
In this case, the weakness will affect not the Kidneys or Liver, but
any of the other organs (i.e. Spleen, Lungs or Heart), depending on
what particular condition is negatively affecting the parents’
health. For example, if a parent has been overworking at the time
of conception, his or her poor health may cause hereditary Spleen
weakness in the child; excessive consumption of alcohol or the use
of drugs or certain medicines may cause a hereditary weakness of
the child’s Heart or Liver.
The mother’s condition during the pregnancy can affect the
fetus. For example, an accident to the mother can cause headaches
later in the child. A shock during pregnancy can cause a baby to
cry during sleep or a child to suffer nightmares (this will also
manifest with a bluish tinge on the forehead and chin).
The clinical manifestations of a poor constitution in each of a
child’s organs are indicated below. Possible causes arising during
pregnancy for each such constitution will be given, but we must
obviously bear in mind that the manifestation may result from a
constitutional weakness in one or both parents and not necessarily
from what happened during pregnancy.
Weak-Spleen constitution
Manifestations of this constitution include flaccid muscles
alongside the spine, digestive problems, vomiting, diarrhoea and a
sallow complexion; the child may be quiet, with a thin body, or fat
if there is Phlegm when newborn but becoming thinner after 1
month.
The cause of a weak Spleen constitution is usually to be found in
improper diet or the mother’s overworking during pregnancy.
1002
Weak-Lung constitution
Manifestations of this constitution include a white complexion,
fear, shyness, proneness to colds, whooping cough, asthma and
eczema, a thin chest, a ‘special’ Lung pulse (
Fig. 48.2
 
) and Lung
cracks on tongue.
FIG. 48.2
 
Special Lung pulse
In pregnancy, the causes of this constitution are usually
emotional upsets to the mother, especially sadness or grief. Of
course, smoking during pregnancy also affects the baby’s Lungs
negatively.
Weak-Heart constitution
Manifestations of this constitution include a bluish tinge on the
forehead, fear, crying at night, and a Heart crack on the tongue; the
1003
child may be tense, with a hot body, red eyes, red cheeks (or the
opposite, i.e. very pale) and a Red tip of the tongue.
In pregnancy, this constitution may be caused by the mother’s
suffering a shock.
Weak-Liver constitution
Manifestations of this constitution include myopia or headaches
from an early age; the child may be 
very tense with a sinewy body,
nocturnal enuresis, restless sleep, twitching in sleep, screaming
during sleep, feeding a lot as a baby, hungry as a child, short-
tempered, a Wiry pulse and a Red tongue with coating.
In pregnancy, this constitution may be caused by the mother’s
emotional stress and anger.
Weak-Kidney constitution
Manifestations of this constitution include nocturnal enuresis; the
child may be listless or timid, with lassitude, a thin body, slow
development in babyhood, atopic asthma and eczema, headaches
from an early age, frequent urination and generally feel cold.
In pregnancy, this constitution may be caused by the mother’s
overworking.
Emotions
Emotions are mental stimuli which influence our affective life.
Under normal circumstances, they are not a cause of disease.
Indeed, ‘emotions’ should be more appropriately called ‘feelings’
and feelings are a natural expression of human life. Without
feelings, we would not be human. Hardly any human being can
avoid being angry, sad, aggrieved, worried, or afraid at some time
in his or her life. For example, the death of a relative provokes a
very natural feeling of grief. It is only when such feelings take over
our life inappropriately and disturb our psyche and body that they
become pathological; when this happens, feelings have turned into
‘moods’.
Moods often arise precisely when feelings are suppressed; for
example, if a certain situation makes us angry and we recognize
the anger we can deal with it and perhaps even come to the
1004
conclusion that part of the anger was a projection of our own
‘Shadow’. In such a case, the anger is a normal feeling that will
probably not have pathological consequences. But if we fail to
recognize our anger, this will be driven to deeper levels of our
psyche and turn into a ‘mood’ that possesses us. We ‘possess’
feelings, but moods possess us.
Thus, emotions (or ‘feelings’) become causes of disease only
when they are excessive, prolonged, suppressed, or unrecognized,
in which case they turn into moods. For example, hardly anyone
can avoid being angry sometimes, but a temporary state of anger
does not lead to disease. However, if a person is constantly angry
about a certain situation in life for many years, or, even worse, if
the anger is not recognized, this emotion will definitely disturb the
Mind and Spirit and cause disease.
In Chinese medicine, ‘emotions’ (the term here signifies causes
of disease, not normal feelings) are mental stimuli which disturb
the Mind and Spirit and, through these, alter the balance of the
Internal Organs and the harmony of Qi and Blood. For this reason,
emotional stress is an internal cause of disease which injures the
Internal Organs directly. Conversely, and this is a very important
feature of Chinese medicine, the state of the Internal Organs
affects our emotional state. For example, if Liver-Yin is deficient
(perhaps from dietary factors) and causes Liver-Yang to rise, this
may result in a person becoming irritable all the time. Vice versa, if
a person is constantly angry about a certain situation or with a
particular person, this may cause Liver-Yang to rise.
The ‘Spiritual Axis’ in 
Chapter 8
 
clearly illustrates the reciprocal
relationship between the emotions and the Internal Organs. It
says: 
‘The Heart’s fear, anxiety and pensiveness injure the Mind …
the Spleen’s worry injures the Intellect … the Liver’s sadness and
shock injure the Ethereal Soul … the Lung’s excessive joy injures the
Corporeal Soul … the Kidney’s anger injures the Will-Power…’.
 
1
On the other hand, further on it says: 
‘If Liver-Blood is deficient
there is fear, if it is in excess there is anger … if Heart-Qi is deficient
there is sadness, if it is in excess there is manic behaviour …’
 
2
These two passages clearly show that, on the one hand,
emotional stress injures the Internal Organs and, on the other
hand, disharmony of the Internal Organs causes emotional
1005
imbalance.
The emotions taken into consideration in Chinese medicine
have varied over the years. From a Five-Element perspective, the
‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic’
 
3
 
considered five emotions, each one
affecting a specific Yin organ:
 
• 
 
anger affecting the Liver
• 
 
joy affecting the Heart
• 
 
pensiveness affecting the Spleen
• 
 
worry affecting the Lungs
• 
 
fear affecting the Kidneys.
However, these are not by any means the only emotions
discussed in the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic’. In other passages
sadness and shock are added, giving seven emotions:
 
• 
 
anger affecting the Liver
• 
 
joy affecting the Heart
• 
 
worry affecting the Lungs and Spleen
• 
 
pensiveness affecting the Spleen
• 
 
sadness affecting the Lungs and Heart
• 
 
fear affecting the Kidneys
• 
 
shock affecting the Kidneys and Heart.
Other doctors considered other emotions such as grief, love,
hatred and desire (craving).
Finally, and interestingly, there is one last emotion which is not
usually mentioned in Chinese medicine, and that is guilt. Yet, in
my opinion, guilt is very pervasive in Western patients and
definitely an emotional cause of disease.
Thus, the list of emotions could be expanded as follows:
 
• 
 
anger (and frustration and resentment) affecting the
Liver
• 
 
joy affecting the Heart
• 
 
worry affecting the Lungs and Spleen
1006
• 
 
pensiveness affecting the Spleen
• 
 
sadness (and grief) affecting the Lungs
• 
 
fear affecting the Kidneys
• 
 
shock affecting the Kidneys and Heart
• 
 
love affecting the Heart
• 
 
hatred affecting the Heart and Liver
• 
 
craving affecting the Heart
• 
 
guilt affecting the Kidneys and Heart.
The effect of each emotion on a relevant organ should not be
interpreted too restrictively. There are passages from the ‘Yellow
Emperor’s Classic’ that attribute the effect of emotions to organs
other than the ones just mentioned. For example, the ‘Spiritual
Axis’ in 
Chapter 28
 
says: 
‘Worry and pensiveness agitate the Heart’.
4
 
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 39
 
says: 
‘Sadness agitates the
Heart…’
 
5
Furthermore, all emotions, besides affecting the relevant organ
directly, affect the Heart indirectly because the Heart houses the
Mind. It alone, being responsible for consciousness and cognition,
can recognize and feel the effect of emotional tension.
Fei Bo Xiong (1800-1879) put it very clearly when he said:
The seven emotions injure the 5 Yin organs selectively, but they
all affect the Heart. Joy injures the Heart … Anger injures the
Liver, the Liver cannot recognize anger but the Heart can,
hence it affects both Liver and Heart. Worry injures the Lungs,
the Lungs cannot recognize it but the Heart can, hence it affects
both Lungs and Heart. Pensiveness injures the Spleen, the
Spleen cannot recognise it but the Heart can, hence it affects
both Spleen and Heart.
 
6
Yu Chang in ‘Principles of Medical Practice’ (1658) says: 
‘Worry
agitates the Heart and has repercussions on the Lungs; pensiveness
agitates the Heart and has repercussions on the Spleen; anger
agitates the Heart and has repercussions on the Liver; fear agitates
the Heart and has repercussions on the Kidneys. Therefore all the
1007
five emotions [including joy] affect the Heart’.
 
7
 
Chinese writing
clearly bears out the idea that all emotions affect the Heart since
the characters for all seven emotions are based on the ‘heart’
radical.
The way that all emotions afflict the Heart also explains why a
Red tip of the tongue, indicating Heart-Fire, is so commonly seen
even in emotional problems related to other organs.
The first effect of emotional stress on the body is to impair the
proper circulation and direction of Qi. Qi is non-substantial and
the Mind, with its mental and emotional energies, is the most non-
material type of Qi. It is therefore natural that emotional stress
affecting the Mind impairs the circulation of Qi first of all.
Each emotion is said to have a particular effect on the circulation
of Qi. The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 39
 
says: ‘ 
Anger makes Qi
rise, joy slows down Qi, sadness dissolves Qi, fear makes Qi
descend … shock scatters Qi … pensiveness knots Qi …’
 
8
 
Dr Chen
Yan in ‘A Treatise on the Three Categories of Causes of Diseases’
(1174) says: 
‘Joy scatters, anger arouses, worry makes Qi
unsmooth, pensiveness knots, sadness makes Qi tight, fear sinks,
shock moves.’
 
9
Again, this should not be taken too literally as, in certain cases,
emotional pressure may have a different effect on Qi from the one
outlined above. For example, fear is said to make Qi descend and it
may cause enuresis, incontinence of urine or diarrhoea, since the
Kidneys control the two lower orifices (urethra and anus). This is
certainly true in cases of extreme and sudden fear, which may
cause incontinence of urine or diarrhoea, or in the case of children
when anxiety about a certain family situation may cause enuresis.
However, the effect of fear on Qi depends also on the state of the
Heart. If the Heart is strong, it will cause Qi 
to descend, but if the
Heart is weak, it will cause Qi to rise in the form of Empty-Heat.
This is more common in old people and in women. In such cases,
fear and anxiety may weaken Kidney-Yin and give rise to Empty-
Heat of the Heart with such symptoms as palpitations, insomnia,
night sweating, a dry mouth, red face and a Rapid pulse.
Box 48.1
 
summarizes the relationships between the seven
emotions and the Internal Organs.
 
BOX 48.1
 
   
 
EMOTIONS AND THE
1008
INTERNAL ORGANS
• 
 
Anger: Liver
• 
 
Joy: Heart
• 
 
Worry: Lungs and Spleen
• 
 
Pensiveness: Spleen
• 
 
Sadness: Lungs and Heart
• 
 
Fear: Kidneys
• 
 
Shock: Kidneys and Heart
Let us now discuss the effects of each emotion individually.
Anger
The term ‘anger’, perhaps more than any other emotion, should be
interpreted very broadly to include several other allied emotional
states, such as resentment, repressed anger, feeling aggrieved,
frustration, irritation, rage, indignation, animosity, or bitterness.
Any of these emotional states can affect the Liver, if they persist
for a long time, causing stagnation of Liver-Qi or Blood, rising of
Liver-Yang or blazing of Liver-Fire. The effect of anger on the Liver
depends, on the one hand, on the person’s reaction to the
emotional stimulus and, on the other hand, on other concurrent
factors. If the anger is bottled up it will cause stagnation of Liver-
Qi, whereas if it is expressed it will cause Liver-Yang rising or
Liver-Fire blazing. In women, stagnation of Liver-Qi may easily
lead to stasis of Liver-Blood. Those who also suffer from some
Kidney-Yin deficiency (perhaps from excessive sexual activity) may
develop Liver-Yang rising. Those who, on the other hand, have a
tendency to Heat (perhaps from excessive consumption of hot
foods) will tend to develop Liver-Fire blazing.
Anger (intended in the broad sense outlined above) makes Qi
rise and many of the symptoms and signs will manifest in the head
and neck, such as headaches, tinnitus, dizziness, red blotches on
the front part of the neck, a red face, thirst, a bitter taste and a Red
tongue with red sides.
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 39
 
says: 
‘Anger makes Qi rise
1009
and causes vomiting of blood and diarrhoea.’
 
10
 
It causes vomiting
of blood because it makes Liver-Qi and Liver-Fire rise and
diarrhoea because it induces Liver-Qi to invade the Spleen.
Anger does not always manifest outwardly with outbursts of
fury, irritability, shouting, a red face, etc. Some individuals may
carry anger inside them for years without ever manifesting it. In
particular, long-standing depression may be due to repressed
anger or resentment. A person who is very depressed may look
subdued and pale, walk slowly and speak with a low voice - all
signs which one would associate with a depletion of Qi and Blood
deriving from sadness or grief. However, when anger rather than
sadness is the cause of disease, the pulse and tongue will clearly
show it: the pulse will be Full and Wiry and the tongue will be Red
with redder sides and with a dry yellow coating. This type of
depression is most probably due to long-standing resentment,
often harboured towards a member of that person’s family.
In some cases anger can affect other organs, especially the
Stomach. This can be due to stagnant Liver-Qi invading the
Stomach. Such a condition is more likely to occur if one gets angry
at mealtimes, which may happen if family meals become occasions
for regular rows. It also happens when there is a pre-existing
weakness of the Stomach, in which case the anger may affect only
the Stomach without even affecting the Liver.
If one regularly gets angry an hour or two after meals, then the
anger will affect the Intestines rather than the Stomach. This
happens, for example, when one goes straight back to a stressful
and frustrating job after lunch. In this case, stagnant Liver-Qi
invades the Intestines and causes abdominal pain, distension and
alternation of constipation with diarrhoea.
Finally, anger, like all other emotions, also affects the Heart. This
organ is particularly prone to be affected by anger also because,
from a Five-Element perspective, the Liver is the mother of the
Heart and often Liver-Fire is transmitted to the Heart giving rise to
Heart-Fire. Anger makes the Heart full with blood rushing to it.
With time, this leads to Blood-Heat affecting the Heart and
therefore the Mind. According to Dr J. H. F. Shen, anger tends to
affect the Heart particularly when the person does a lot of jogging
or exercising; this is because excessive exercise dilates the heart,
1010
which is 
then more prone to be affected by the transmission of
Fire from the Liver to the Heart.
In some cases, anger disguises other emotions such as guilt.
Some people may harbour guilt inside for many years and be
unable or unwilling to recognize it; they may then use anger as a
mask for their guilt. Moreover, there are some families in which
everyone is perpetually angry. This happens more in
Mediterranean countries such as Italy, Spain or Greece. In these
families, anger is used as a mask to hide other emotions such as
guilt, fear or dislike of being controlled, or to conceal weakness or
an inferiority complex. When this is the case, it is important to be
aware of this situation as one needs to treat not the anger but the
underlying psychological and emotional condition.
Box 48.2
 
summarizes the effects of anger.
 
BOX 48.2
 
   
 
ANGER
• 
 
Affects the Liver (and Heart)
• 
 
Makes Qi rise
• 
 
Expressed anger causes Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Fire
blazing
• 
 
Repressed anger causes Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Anger at mealtimes affects Stomach
• 
 
Anger after eating affects Intestines
• 
 
Anger may disguise guilt
Joy
A normal state of joy is not in itself a cause of disease; on the
contrary, it is a beneficial mental state which favours a smooth
functioning of the Internal Organs and their mental faculties. The
‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 39
 
says: 
‘Joy makes the Mind
peaceful and relaxed, it benefits the Nutritive and Defensive Qi and
it makes Qi relax and slow down.’
 
11
 
On the other hand, in 
Chapter
2
 
the same book says: 
‘The Heart … controls joy, joy injures the
Heart, fear counteracts joy.’
 
12
What is meant by ‘joy’ as a cause of disease is obviously not a
state of healthy contentment but one of excessive excitement and
1011
craving, which can injure the Heart. This happens to people who
live in a state of continuous mental stimulation (however
pleasurable) or excessive excitement - in other words, a life of
‘hard playing’.
As indicated above, inordinate craving is an aspect of the
emotion ‘joy’ and it stirs up the Minister Fire, which
overstimulates the Mind.
Joy, in the broad sense indicated above, makes the Heart larger.
This leads to excessive stimulation of the Heart, which, in time,
may lead to Heart-related symptoms and signs. These may deviate
somewhat from the classical Heart patterns. The main
manifestations would be palpitations, overexcitability, insomnia,
restlessness and talking a lot; the tip of the tongue would be red.
The pulse would typically be Slow, slightly Overflowing but Empty
on the left Front position.
Joy may also be marked out as a cause of disease when it is
sudden; this happens, for example, on hearing good news
unexpectedly. In this situation, ‘joy’ is akin to shock. Fei Bo Xiong
in ‘Medical Collection from Four Families from Meng He’ says:
‘Joy injures the Heart … [it causes] Yang Qi to float and the blood
vessels to become too open and dilated…’
 
13
 
In these cases of
sudden joy and excitement the Heart dilates and slows down and
the pulse becomes Slow and slightly Overflowing but Empty. One
can understand the effect of sudden joy further if one thinks of
situations when a migraine attack is precipitated by the excitement
of suddenly hearing good news. Another example of joy as a cause
of disease is that of sudden laughter triggering a heart attack; this
example also confirms the relationship existing between the Heart
and laughter.
Finally, one can also get an idea of the effects of joy as an
emotion by considering children, in whom overexcitement usually
ends in tears.
Box 48.3
 
summarizes the effects of joy.
 
BOX 48.3
 
   
 
JOY
• 
 
Affects the Heart
• 
 
Makes Qi slow down
• 
 
Joy is a state of excessive excitement/craving
• 
 
Joy makes the heart larger
1012
Worry
Worry is one of the most common emotional causes of disease in
our society. The extremely rapid and radical social changes that
have occurred in Western societies in the past decades have
created a climate of insecurity and anxiety in all spheres of life. Of
course, there are also people who, because of a pre-existing
disharmony of the Internal Organs, are very prone to worry, even
about very minor incidents in life. For example, many people
appear to be very tense and worry a lot. On close interrogation
about their work and family life, often nothing of note emerges.
They simply worry excessively about trivial everyday activities and
they tend to do everything in a hurry and be pressed for time. This
may be due to a constitutional weakness of the Spleen, Heart or
Lungs, or a combination of these.
Worry knots Qi, which means that it causes stagnation of Qi, and
it affects both the Lungs and the Spleen: the Lungs because when
one is worried breathing is shallow, and the Spleen because this
organ is responsible for thinking and ideas. Worry is the
pathological counterpart of the Spleen’s mental activity in
generating ideas.
In a few cases, worry may also affect the Liver as a result of the
stagnation of the Lungs; in a Five-Element sense this corresponds
to Metal insulting Wood. When this happens, the neck and
shoulders will tense up and become stiff and painful.
The symptoms and signs caused by worry will vary according to
whether they affect the Lungs or the Spleen. If worry affects the
Lungs it disturbs the breathing and the Corporeal Soul (
Po
 
); this
will cause an uncomfortable feeling in the chest, slight
breathlessness, anxiety, tensing of the shoulders, sometimes a dry
cough and a pale complexion. The right Front pulse position (of
the Lungs) may feel slightly Tight or Wiry, indicating the knotting
action of worry on Qi.
If worry affects the Spleen it may cause poor appetite, a slight
epigastric discomfort, some abdominal pain and distension,
tiredness and a pale complexion. The right Middle pulse position
(Spleen) will feel slightly Tight but Weak. If worry affects the
Stomach as well (which happens if one worries at mealtimes), the
right Middle pulse may be Weak-Floating.
1013
Box 48.4
 
summarizes the effects of worry.
 
BOX 48.4
 
   
 
WORRY
• 
 
Affects the Lungs, Heart and Spleen
• 
 
Knots Qi
• 
 
It may also affect the Liver and Stomach
• 
 
It affects breathing and the Corporeal Soul (
Po
 
)
Pensiveness
Pensiveness is very similar to worry in its character and effect. It
consists in brooding, constantly thinking about certain events or
people (even though not worrying), nostalgic hankering after the
past and generally thinking intensely about life rather than living
it. In extreme cases, pensiveness leads to obsessive thoughts. In a
different sense, pensiveness also includes excessive mental work
in the process of one’s work or study.
Pensiveness affects the Spleen and, like worry, it knots Qi. It will
therefore cause similar symptoms to those outlined above. The
only difference will be that the pulse of the right side not only will
feel slightly Tight, but will have no wave. One can feel the normal
pulse as a wave under the fingers moving from the Rear towards
the Front position. The pulse without wave lacks this flowing
movement from Rear to Front position and it is instead felt as if
each individual position were separate from the others (see 
Fig.
50.1 on p. 477
 
). In the case of pensiveness, the pulse will lack a
wave only on the right Middle position. A pulse without wave in
the Front and Middle position indicates Sadness.
Box 48.5
 
summarizes the effects of pensiveness.
 
BOX 48.5
 
   
 
PENSIVENESS
• 
 
Affects the Spleen and Heart
• 
 
It knots Qi
• 
 
In severe cases it leads to obsessive thoughts
• 
 
‘Pensiveness’ include also excessive mental work
1014
Sadness and grief
Sadness includes the emotion of regret, as when someone regrets a
certain action or decision in the past and the Mind is constantly
turned towards that time. Sadness and grief affect the Lungs and
Heart. In fact, according to the ‘Simple Questions’, sadness affects
the Lungs via the Heart. It says in 
Chapter 39
 
: 
‘Sadness makes the
Heart cramped and agitated; this pushes towards the lungs’ lobes,
the Upper Burner becomes obstructed, Nutritive and Defensive Qi
cannot circulate freely, Heat accumulates and dissolves Qi.’
 
14
According to this passage then, sadness primarily affects the
Heart, and the Lungs suffer in consequence since they are both
situated in the Upper Burner. The Lungs govern Qi and sadness
and grief deplete Qi. This is often manifested on the pulse as a
Weak quality on both left and right Front positions (Heart and
Lungs). In particular, the pulse on both Front positions is Short
and has no wave, that is, it does not flow smoothly towards the
thumb. Other manifestations deriving from sadness and grief
include a weak voice, tiredness, pale complexion, slight
breathlessness, weeping and a feeling of oppression in the chest.
In women, deficiency of Lung-Qi from sadness or grief often leads
to Liver-Blood deficiency and amenorrhoea.
Although sadness and grief deplete Qi, and therefore lead to
deficiency of Qi, they may also, after a long time, lead to
stagnation of Qi, because the deficient Lung- and Heart-Qi fail to
circulate properly in the chest.
As mentioned before, each emotion can affect other organs
apart from its ‘specific’ one. For example, the ‘Spiritual Axis’ in
Chapter 8
 
mentions injury of the Liver from sadness rather than
anger: 
‘When sadness affects the Liver it injures the Ethereal Soul;
this causes mental confusion … the Yin is damaged, the tendons
contract and there is hypochondrial discomfort.’
 
15
 
This shows how
organs can be affected by emotions other than the one ‘specific’ to
them. In this case, sadness can naturally affect the Ethereal Soul
and therefore Liver-Yin. Sadness has a depleting effect on Qi and it
therefore, in some cases, depletes Liver-Yin leading to mental
confusion, depression, lack of a sense of direction in life and
inability to plan one’s life.
Finally, some doctors consider that grief which is unexpressed
1015
and borne without tears affects the Kidneys. According to them,
when grief is held in without weeping, the fluids cannot come out
(in the form of tears) and they upset the fluid metabolism within
the Kidneys. This would happen only in situations when grief had
been felt for many years.
Box 48.6
 
summarizes the effects of sadness and grief.
 
BOX 48.6
 
   
 
SADNESS AND GRIEF
• 
 
Affect the Lungs and Heart
• 
 
Deplete Qi
• 
 
In time, they may also lead to stagnation of Qi
• 
 
Sadness may also affect Liver-Blood in women
• 
 
Unexpressed grief without tears affects the Kidneys
Fear
‘Fear’ includes both a chronic state of fear and anxiety, and a
sudden fright. It depletes Kidney-Qi and makes Qi descend. The
‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 39
 
says: 
‘Fear depletes the Essence, it
blocks the Upper Burner, which makes Qi descend to the Lower
Burner.’
 
16
 
Examples of Qi descending are nocturnal enuresis in
children and incontinence of urine or diarrhoea in adults,
following a sudden fright.
Situations of chronic anxiety and fear will have different effects
on Qi depending on the state of the Heart. If the Heart is strong, it
will cause Qi to descend, but if the Heart is weak, it will cause Qi
to rise in the form of Empty-Heat. This is more common in women
and in old people of either sex as fear and anxiety weaken Kidney-
Yin and give rise to Empty-Heat of the Heart with such symptoms
as palpitations, insomnia, night sweating, a dry mouth, a malar
flush and a Rapid pulse.
If a person has a tendency to a constitutional weakness of the
Heart (manifested with a midline crack on the tongue extending all
the way to the tip), fear will affect the Heart rather than the
Kidneys.
There are, however, other causes of fear that are not related to
the Kidneys. Liver-Blood deficiency and a Gall-Bladder deficiency
1016
can also make the person fearful.
Box 48.7
 
summarizes the effects of fear.
 
BOX 48.7
 
   
 
FEAR
• 
 
Affects the Kidneys and Heart
• 
 
Makes Qi descend (in theory)
• 
 
May also make Qi ascend (in my opinion)
Shock
Mental shock scatters Qi and affects the Heart and Kidneys. It
causes a sudden depletion of Heart-Qi, makes the Heart smaller
and may lead to palpitations, breathlessness and insomnia. This is
often reflected in the pulse with the Moving quality, that is, a pulse
that is short, slippery, shaped like a bean, rapid and gives the
impression of vibrating as it pulsates.
Shock also ‘closes’ the Heart or makes the Heart smaller. This
can be observed in a bluish tinge on the forehead and a Heart
pulse which is Tight and Fine.
Shock also affects the Kidneys because the body draws on the
Kidney-Essence to supplement the sudden depletion of Qi. For
this reason, shock can cause such symptoms as night sweating, a
dry mouth, dizziness, or tinnitus.
Box 48.8
 
summarizes the effects of shock.
 
BOX 48.8
 
   
 
SHOCK
• 
 
Affects Kidneys, Spleen and Heart
• 
 
Suspends Qi, causes a sudden depletion of Heart-Qi
• 
 
Makes heart smaller or ‘closes’ it
Love
‘Love’ here means not normal love, such as that of a mother
towards her child or that between two lovers, but rather the
condition when love becomes an obsession or when it is
misdirected, as when a person loves someone who is persistently
1017
hurtful. In this context, ‘love’ indicates a rather obsessive love for a
particular person, a misdirected emotion focusing on someone
who persistently hurts the lover, whether physically or mentally, or
narcissistic love. Obsessive jealousy would 
also fall under this
broad category. In these senses, love becomes a cause of disease.
‘Love’ in the sense outlined above affects the Heart and quickens
Qi. This will be felt on the left Front position (Heart) with an
Overflowing quality, and the pulse will also be rapid. It may cause
such symptoms and signs as palpitations, a red tip of the tongue, a
red face, insomnia and mental restlessness.
Box 48.9
 
summarizes the effects of ‘love’.
 
BOX 48.9
 
   
 
‘LOVE’
• 
 
Affects the Heart
• 
 
Quickens Qi
• 
 
Consists of:
— 
 
obsessive love
— 
 
misdirected love (towards a person who
hurts us)
— 
 
jealousy and possessiveness
— 
 
narcissistic love
Hatred
Hatred is quite similar to anger but differs from it in so far as it
indicates a ‘cold’ and calculating malice rather than the
uncontrollable and spontaneous outbursts that are typical of
anger. When harboured for many years, hatred is a very damaging
and destructive emotion. It affects the Heart and Liver and it knots
and slows down Qi. It can be felt on the pulse of the left-hand side
with a Wiry but Slow quality. The symptoms and signs caused by
hatred include chest pain, hypochondriac pain, insomnia,
headache and palpitations. These manifestations include pain in
some part of the body as, when hatred is felt for many years, it
turns inwards to injure only the person feeling it.
Box 48.10
 
summarizes the effects of hatred.
1018
 
BOX 48.10
 
   
 
HATRED
• 
 
Affects the Liver and Heart
• 
 
Similar to anger
• 
 
Knots and slows down Qi
Craving
‘Desire’ means excessive craving. The inclusion of this as a cause of
disease reflects the Buddhist influence on Chinese medicine,
which began during the Tang dynasty. The ultimate cause of
disease according to Buddhist thought is desire, that is, clinging to
external objects or other people and always wanting more. This
excessive craving, which is one aspect of the emotion of ‘joy’ in
Chinese medicine, causes the Minister Fire to blaze upwards and
harass the Mind. By this is meant a state of constant craving which
is never satisfied. This can include craving for material objects or
recognition.
Craving affects the Heart and it scatters Qi. Craving also affects
the Pericardium by stirring the Minister Fire. In disease, Minister
Fire refers to a pathological Empty-Fire arising from the Kidneys; it
affects the Pericardium and therefore the Mind.
 
17
 
If the Mind is
calm, settled and content, the Pericardium follows its direction and
there is a happy and balanced life. If the Mind is weak and
dissatisfied, the Pericardium follows the demands of the craving
and the person constantly desires new objects or new marks of
recognition, which, however, even when attained, are never
satisfying and leave the person more frustrated. It is for these
reasons that both Daoism and Buddhism put the emphasis on
reducing craving to prevent the arousal of Minister Fire, which
stirs the Mind.
Craving will cause Heart-Fire or Heart Empty-Heat depending
on the underlying condition of the person. If there is a tendency to
Yin deficiency, which is common in people who tend to overwork,
it will lead to Heart Empty-Heat. This will cause palpitations, a
malar flush, a dry throat, insomnia and mental restlessness.
Box 48.11
 
summarizes the effects of craving.
1019
 
BOX 48.11
 
   
 
CRAVING
• 
 
Affects the Heart and Pericardium
• 
 
Scatters Qi
• 
 
Akin to ‘joy’
Guilt
Guilt is an extremely common emotion and a cause of disease in
the West. A feeling of guilt may derive from the transgression of
social or religious taboos or from having done something wrong
which is later regretted. People who are prone to blame themselves
for everything that goes wrong may also suffer an unjustified and
subjective sense of guilt.
Guilt affects the Heart and Kidneys and it causes Qi either to
stagnate or to sink. It may cause stagnation of Qi in the chest,
epigastrium, or abdomen, and its clinical manifestations include
an uncomfortable feeling in the chest, epigastric or abdominal
pain and distension and a Fine pulse. The tongue will have a red
tip and the pulse will be vibrating as it pulsates. The eyes will look
unstable and often flap shut while a person is talking.
If it affects the Kidneys, guilt may cause Qi to sink giving rise to
urinary problems such as a slight incontinence, dribbling of urine
and a bearing-down feeling in the hypogastrium.
In some cases, guilt may also arise from the repression of anger.
When anger is repressed and not recognized, it may turn inwards
and cause an attitude of self-punishment and guilt. When guilt
results from repressed anger, the pulse will be Wiry.
Box 48.12
 
summarizes the effects of guilt.
 
BOX 48.12
 
   
 
GUILT
• 
 
Affects the Kidneys and Heart
• 
 
May cause sinking or stagnation of Qi
Overwork
1020
By ‘overwork’ I mean not physical work but the habit of working
long hours every day without adequate rest, usually accompanied
by irregular eating for many years. As stated earlier, someone who
‘overworks’ leaves home perhaps at 7 in the morning, catches a
train to work, works under stressful conditions through the lunch
hour (eating a sandwich at the desk), and returns home at about 9
in the evening. When such a routine is carried out for many years,
it constitutes what I call ‘overwork’. It is an extremely common
cause of disease in Western patients about which they need to be
educated. Most people who follow such a routine at work are
surprised when I suggest to them that they work too much and
that their working habits might have something to do with their
illness.
Overwork as defined above is probably the most common cause
of Yin deficiency in the patients we see. It depletes primarily
Kidney-Yin but also Liver- and Stomach-Yin, depending on the
circumstances. In women, it is likely to injure Liver-Yin as well as
Kidney-Yin; on the other hand, when overwork is associated with
an irregular diet (as it often is), it injures Stomach-Yin.
Diet
Diet influences our health in two main ways: first through our
choice of foods, and secondly through our eating habits.
Choice of foods
Our choice of foods can become unbalanced in four main ways:
eating too much cold food, eating too much hot food, eating too
much greasy food, and not eating enough.
Eating too much cold food
‘Cold’ food includes raw fruit, raw vegetables and cold drinks.
Patients are often surprised to be told that an excessive
consumption of such foods might be detrimental as this advice
runs counter to the prevailing view of ‘healthy’ eating, that is,
eating lots of fruit and salads in order to secure the maximum
intake of vitamins and minerals. It is true that raw foods are rich in
vitamins and minerals and a small consumption of such foods is
1021
not detrimental and indeed healthy. It becomes detrimental from
the point of view of Chinese medicine only when the mainstay of
someone’s diet is exclusively raw fruit and vegetables.
Excessive consumption of cold foods (including cold drinks)
injures the Spleen and leads to internal Cold in the body. This will
cause a pale complexion, loose stools, tiredness, a feeling of cold,
and abdominal pain.
Eating too much hot food
‘Hot’ foods include red meat (especially lamb, beef and game),
spices and alcohol. Excessive consumption of hot foods causes
Heat in the Internal Organs and will manifest with a red
complexion, a feeling of heat, thirst, insomnia, mental restlessness
and a Red tongue.
Eating too much greasy food
‘Greasy’ foods include all dairy foods, bananas and peanuts. In
addition, this category includes foods cooked in animal fats, and
fried or deep-fried foods. Sugar is also a ‘greasy’ food.
Greasy foods lead to the formation of Dampness or Phlegm, or
both, and an excessive consumption of such foods is extremely
common in Western countries, especially in the USA and Northern
European countries.
Not eating enough
In affluent countries, ‘not eating enough’ is due to following a
restrictive diet, often aimed at slimming, and may also result from
following a vegetarian diet injudiciously, especially in women.
Many young girls become vegetarian and, not having a good
knowledge of food combining, they tend to eat a lot of salads and
cheese, which injure the Spleen and lead to Dampness. Such girls
will tend to be pale and suffer from tiredness, digestive problems,
loose stools and menstrual problems; the tongue will be Pale and
the pulse Choppy.
Box 48.13
 
summarizes the effects of diet.
 
BOX 48.13
 
   
 
DIET - CHOICE OF FOODS
• 
 
Too much cold food: injures Spleen and leads to Cold
1022
• 
 
Too much hot food: leads to Heat
• 
 
Too much greasy food: leads to Dampness and
Phlegm
• 
 
Not eating enough: leads to Qi and Blood deficiency
Eating habits
Chinese medicine places stress not only on the range of foods
eaten but also, and as important as what foods we eat, on the way
that we eat. We may eat a very balanced diet with exclusively
organic foods but if our eating habits are chaotic this will lead to
disease.
Chinese medicine stresses the importance of routine and
regularity in one’s diet. It also stresses the importance of having a
short break after eating at lunchtime. Unfortunately, most people
who work full-time have very irregular eating habits, which may
include any of the following:
 
• 
 
eating in a hurry
• 
 
eating standing up
• 
 
eating at one’s desk while working
• 
 
having business lunches
• 
 
eating without routine (e.g. a very large business
lunch one day, followed by skipping lunch the next)
• 
 
eating late in the evening.
Such eating habits injure Stomach-Qi initially and then
Stomach-Yin. One of the clearest signs of this, apart from digestive
problems, is a tongue with a Stomach crack or scattered Stomach
cracks and without coating.
Climate
Invasion of external pathogenic factors is an important cause of
disease in Painful Obstruction Syndrome (
Bi
 
). The main external
1023
pathogenic factors are Wind, Dampness and Cold. Once in the
body, any of these pathogenic factors can turn into or combine
with Heat.
Wind
Wind is characterized by soreness and pain of muscles and joints,
limitation of movement, with the pain moving from joint to joint.
In acute cases the pulse would be Floating and slightly Rapid. An
important characteristic of Wind is that the pain moves from joint
to joint on different days and it may also come and go quickly.
Dampness
Dampness is characterized by pain, soreness and swelling in
muscles and joints with a feeling of heaviness and numbness of
the limbs, the pain being fixed in one place and aggravated by
damp weather. In acute cases the pulse would be Slow and slightly
Slippery.
Cold
Cold is characterized by a severe pain in a joint or muscle with
limitation of movement, usually unilateral. In acute cases the
pulse is Tight.
Heat
Heat originates from any of the previous three types when the
exterior pathogenic factor turns into Heat in the Interior and gives
rise to Heat Painful Obstruction Syndrome. This happens
especially with an underlying deficiency of Yin. Heat is
characterized by pain and redness, swelling and heat in the joints
(which feel hot to the touch), limitation of movement and severe
pain. In acute cases there is thirst, a fever which does not abate
after sweating and a Slippery and Rapid pulse. This syndrome is
characterized not just by Heat, but Damp-Heat. In fact, Dampness
is the primary aspect of this syndrome and Heat the secondary
one.
The diagnosis of external pathogenic factors is based on two
main factors: the acute onset of the problem and a sensitivity of
pain to weather changes.
1024
Besides affecting the joints, climatic pathogenic factors can also
affect the Internal Organs directly. This happens when external
Cold invades the Stomach (causing acute epigastric pain and
vomiting), the Intestines (causing acute abdominal pain and
diarrhoea) or the Uterus (causing acute dysmenorrhoea).
Box 48.14
 
summarizes the climatic factors affecting joints.
 
BOX 48.14
 
   
 
CLIMATIC FACTORS
AFFECTING JOINTS
Wind: pain moving from joint to joint
Cold: severe pain in one joint
Dampness: dull ache and swelling of joints
Damp-Heat: ache, swelling and redness of joints
Trauma
By ‘trauma’ is meant physical trauma. Accidents cause local
stagnation of Qi. If the trauma is severe, it also causes local Blood
stasis.
The diagnosis of trauma is obvious from the history, except
when the trauma occurred several years before 
and the patient has
either forgotten it or not related it to the presenting problem.
If the trauma causes local Blood stasis, this may manifest on the
tongue with a single purple spot which (when compared with
points) is relatively large. The tongue reflects also areas of the
body and the location of the purple spot points to the site of the
trauma, which may also be very old (
Fig. 48.3
 
).
1025
FIG. 48.3
 
Body areas reflected on the tongue
Thus, for example, a small purple spot on the right side of the
tip may indicate a trauma to the right side of the head.
Drugs Including Immunizations
Medicinal drugs
Obviously medicinal drugs are an important cause of disease in
Western patients. A discussion of the side-effects of drugs is
beyond the scope of this book. It should be noted, however, that
with few important exceptions (such as chemotherapy and
steroids), the side-effects of drugs are relatively short lived (once
they are stopped) compared with other causes of disease. For
example, an antidepressant will have some well-known side-effects
but these will stop when the drug is discontinued and will not
cause lasting damage. It is different with the other causes of
disease such as heredity, emotional stress or diet. For example, an
emotional problem dating back to a person’s childhood will have
long-lasting effects even after the person has recognized the
problem and taken steps to face it and resolve it. Likewise, if a
person eats irregularly for some years, the effects of this may be
very long lasting even a considerable time after the diet has been
rectified.
1026
Immunizations
Immunizations, in my opinion, lead to the formation of Latent
Heat. Latent Heat is formed when a pathogenic factor invades the
body without causing apparent symptoms; the pathogenic factor
penetrates the Interior, turns into Heat and ‘lurks’ in the Interior
for some time. After some time (usually weeks or months), the
Heat emerges in the form of Latent Heat with symptoms such as
sudden weariness, tired limbs, insomnia, thirst, irritability, Red
tongue and Rapid pulse. It should be stressed that the fact that the
Latent Heat emerges does not mean that it is being expelled but
simply that it is manifesting after lurking in the Interior for some
time.
In order to understand the effect of immunizations we need to
refer to the theory of the Four Levels. According to this theory, an
external pathogenic factor invades the body passing through four
energetic levels: the Defensive-Qi, Qi, Nutritive-Qi and Blood
levels. (See 
Fig. 104.2 on p. 959
 
.)
The Defensive-Qi level is an exterior level, that is, at this stage
the pathogenic factor is on the Exterior of the body. At the Qi level,
the pathogenic factor turns into interior Heat. The three levels, Qi,
Nutritive-Qi and Blood, are all interior and all characterized by
interior Heat but at three different energetic layers, Qi being the
most superficial and Blood the deepest. With an immunization, it
is as if the ‘pathogenic factor’ (i.e. the vaccine) were injected
directly at the Blood level. Once there, it ‘lurks’, turns into Heat
and emerges later as Latent Heat.
It is of course impossible to prove, but my impression is that
many modern autoimmune diseases, some cancers (such as
leukemia) and AIDS manifest as Latent Heat and their growing
incidence may partly be due to immunizations.
Recreational drugs
The ill-effects of ‘recreational’ drugs such as cocaine, heroin, LSD
and Ecstasy are well known. However, so-called ‘soft’ drugs such as
cannabis also have a profound impact on our health. Regular
smoking of cannabis over a long period has definite neurological
actions on the brain affecting memory and concentration
negatively.
 
18
 
It is my experience that these effects are permanent
1027
in long-term users even after they stop 
using the drug. Long-term
use of the drug may also cause loss of brain substance; cannabis
also impairs cell division by lymphocytes in tissue culture.
 
19
In my experience, long-term users display a certain lack of
centredness and a weak Stomach and Spleen.
Excessive Sexual Activity
By ‘sexual activity’ is meant ejaculation in men and orgasm in
women. Excessive sexual activity may weaken the Kidneys because
sperm is a direct emanation of the Kidney-Essence (sexual activity
not culminating in ejaculation does not deplete the Kidneys). It is
difficult to define what is ‘excessive’ because it depends on the age
and health of the person. A very rough guide to the recommended
frequency of ejaculation in healthy men is to divide the man’s age
by five (e.g. every 8 days in a 40-year-old man). It should be
stressed that this period should be extended if the man is in poor
health and especially if he suffers from a Kidney deficiency.
Excessive sexual activity weakens the Kidney-Essence and may
cause backache, dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory and
concentration, and weak knees.
I have so far referred to men deliberately because, in my
opinion, the effect of sexual activity in women is quite different
from that in men. Sperm in men is an emanation of the Kidney-
Essence; the equivalent in women is menstrual blood. Sperm and
menstrual blood constitute the ‘
Tian Gui
 
’ essence which arrives at
puberty. Quite simply, men lose sperm during orgasm but women
do not lose menstrual blood; therefore, sexual activity and orgasm
in women are not weakening to the Kidneys. A cause of disease in
women equivalent to excessive ejaculation in men would be a
heavy loss of blood after childbirth or a heavy monthly blood loss
in a woman suffering from menorrhagia. Some people say that the
increased fluid lubrication in the vagina during sexual arousal and
orgasm is equivalent to ejaculation in men. I tend to disagree with
this view because, in my opinion, such fluids are part of Body
Fluids rather than an emanation of the Kidney-Essence.
Finally, it should be mentioned that lack of sexual activity may
also be a cause of disease but only when sexual desire is present. If
1028
sexual desire is totally absent, then lack of sexual activity has no
health repercussions. Sexual desire makes the Minister Fire rise
upwards; with orgasm this Fire is discharged downwards. When
sexual desire is unfulfilled, the Minister Fire rises up without
being discharged during orgasm and it affects the Heart, causing
Heart-Fire or stagnation of Heart-Qi.
NOTES
1. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:24 First published c. 100 
BC
2. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 24.
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:36–42 First
published c. 100
BC
 
.
4. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 67
5. 
Simple Questions, p. 221.
6. 
Xiong, Fei Bo, et al. Medical Collection from Four Families
from Meng He (
Meng He Si Jia Yi Ji
 
 
). Nanjing:
Jiangsu Science Publishing House, 1985; 40.
7. 
Yu Chang 1658 Principles of Medical Practice, cited in Qin,
Wang Ke. Theory of the Mind in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong
Yi Shen Zhu Xue Shuo
 
 
). Beijing: Ancient Chinese
Medical Texts Publishing House, 1988; 34.
8. 
Simple Questions, p. 221.
9. 
Yan, Chen. A Treatise on the Three Categories of Causes of
Diseases (
San Yin Ji Yi Bing Zheng Fang Lun
 
 
), cited
in Wang Ke Qin 1988 Theory of the Mind in Chinese
Medicine (
Zhong Yi Shen Zhu Xue Shuo
 
 
). Beijing:
Ancient Chinese Medical Texts Publishing House, 1974; 55.
10. 
Simple Questions, p. 221.
11. 
Simple Questions, p. 221.
12. 
Simple Questions, p. 38.
13. 
Medical Collection from Four Families from Meng He, p. 40
14. 
Simple Questions, p. 221.
15. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 24
1029
16. 
Simple Questions, p. 222.
17. 
For this reason ‘Minister Fire’ refers both to the
physiological or pathological Fire of the Kidneys and to the
Pericardium. This accounts for the assignment of the right
Rear position on the pulse variously to the Kidney-Yang by
some doctors, or to the Pericardium by others
18. 
Lawrence, DR. Clinical Pharmacology. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1973; 14–29.
19. 
Lawrence, DR. Clinical Pharmacology. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1973; 14. 30–14. 31.
1030
PART 3
DIAGNOSIS BY
PALPATION
1031
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
PALPATION
 
Part contents
49. 
 
Pulse diagnosis
50. 
 
Pulse qualities
51. 
 
Palpation of parts of the body
52. 
 
Palpation of channels
INTRODUCTION
Diagnosis by palpation includes palpation of the pulse, chest and
abdomen, various parts of the body, channels and points. The two
most important parts of diagnosis by palpation are the pulse and
the abdomen.
Pulse diagnosis developed to a very high level of sophistication
in Chinese medicine, benefiting from an unbroken continuous
tradition for over 2000 years. The first systematic elements of pulse
diagnosis are found in the Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine. It is possible that, in later centuries (from the Song
dynasty onwards) when Confucian morality prevailed, pulse
diagnosis was developed in preference to abdominal diagnosis as
it was considered improper for male physicians to palpate the
body of women.
1032
Diagnosis by palpation of channels and points is very important
especially for acupuncturists as palpation and needling of tender
points merges diagnosis and therapy in one.
1033
CHAPTER 49
 
PULSE
DIAGNOSIS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE ‘NINE REGIONS’ OF THE PULSE FROM THE ‘YELLOW
EMPEROR’S CLASSIC OF INTERNAL MEDICINE’
THE PULSE IN THE ‘CLASSIC OF DIFFICULTIES’
THE THREE SECTIONS OF THE PULSE
ASSIGNMENT OF PULSE POSITIONS TO ORGANS
Organ positions on the pulse
Reconciling different pulse arrangements
THE THREE LEVELS
METHOD OF PULSE TAKING
Time
Levelling the arm
Equalizing the breathing
Placing the fingers
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PULSE
Season
1034
Gender
Age
Body build
Menstruation
Pregnancy
Fan Guan Mai
 
and 
Xie Fei Mai
ATTRIBUTES OF THE NORMAL PULSE
Spirit
Stomach-Qi
Root
GUIDELINES FOR INTERPRETING THE PULSE
Feeling the pulse as a whole with three fingers
Feeling the spirit, Stomach-Qi and root
Feeling the three positions together first and
then individually
Feeling the three levels
Feeling the overall quality of the pulse, if there
is one
Feeling the pulse quality, strength and level of
each individual position by rolling and pushing
the fingers
Counting the pulse rate
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
The pulse is often crucial in clinching a
diagnosis
The pulse is essential to distinguish Deficiency
from Excess
1035
The pulse is essential to determine the
treatment principle
The pulse in emotional problems
The pulse as an indicator of an organ problem
The pulse as an indicator of a heart problem
The pulse does not necessarily reflect all the
aspects of a disharmony
The pulse indicates disharmonies beyond the
presenting patterns
The pulse can indicate an underlying Deficiency
in the absence of symptoms
The pulse in cancer
INTEGRATION OF PULSE AND TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
Qi and Blood
Time factor
When the pulse is Rapid and the tongue is not
Red
When the pulse is Slow and the tongue is Red
Pulse diagnosis adds detail to tongue diagnosis
LIMITATIONS OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
It is subjective
It is subject to short-term influences
INTRODUCTION
Pulse diagnosis is the most difficult of the Chinese diagnostic arts:
it is a very complex subject which must involve a deep level of
understanding and a great deal 
of skill. An essential diagnostic
1036
tool for all practitioners of Chinese medicine, pulse diagnosis is
truly an ‘art’; it has more right to that title than any other of the
Chinese diagnostic skills. To acquire the skills of good pulse
diagnosis requires great patience and to become proficient takes
years of practice. It is a study that has no end: one will continue to
develop one’s skills and understanding of pulse diagnosis
throughout a lifetime of practice.
What is one feeling when taking the pulse? Basically, we are
feeling the pulsation of Qi through the pulsation of Blood. Qi is a
subtle energy and cannot be ‘felt’ (except by expert practitioners of
Qi Gong) or ‘measured’; we therefore use the radial artery to feel
the pulsation of the blood to give us an idea of the state of Qi. This
is made possible by the strong link between Qi and Blood: Qi is
the commander of Blood and Blood is the mother of Qi. Thus,
through the pulsation of Blood, we can feel the state of Qi. That we
use pulse diagnosis to feel the state of Qi is also shown by the fact
that the pulse is felt on the radial artery where the Lung channel
flows; because the Lungs govern Qi, that particular artery tells us
about the state of Qi.
Pulse diagnosis is important for two reasons: it helps to identify
the internal organ affected or the prevailing pattern and it reflects
the whole complex of Qi and Blood.
The pulse identifies organ and pattern disharmony
Within the general picture of a disharmony, the pulse may be
considered to be a manifestation like any other (e.g. thirst,
dizziness, red face, etc.). The unique significance of pulse
diagnosis, however, is that it, by itself, allows us to diagnose a
pattern, even in the absence of other symptoms. For example,
dizziness indicates a Kidney deficiency only if it occurs together
with other Kidney-deficiency symptoms, such as tinnitus, lower
backache and night sweating. However, a Deep-Weak Kidney pulse
on both Rear positions by itself unequivocally indicates a Kidney
deficiency.
In addition, the pulse may also indicate, by itself, a pattern with
some certainty. For example, dizziness may be caused by Phlegm
and, in order to diagnose this, it should be accompanied by other
symptoms or signs of Phlegm such as a feeling of oppression in
1037
the chest, a feeling of muzziness in the head, a Swollen tongue,
etc. However, a Slippery pulse by itself indicates Phlegm
(excluding of course the case of pregnancy).
The pulse gives us an idea of the state of Qi and Blood
as a whole
Another way in which the pulse differs from other clinical
manifestations is that it gives a picture of the body as a whole, of
the state of Qi and Blood, of the state of Yin and Yang organs, of
the state of parts of the body, and of the constitution of an
individual. No other clinical manifestation can do that and only
the tongue comes anywhere near so doing.
THE ‘NINE REGIONS’ OF THE PULSE
FROM THE ‘YELLOW EMPEROR’S
CLASSIC OF INTERNAL MEDICINE’
The practice of feeling the pulse on the radial artery was described
in the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ (c. 
AD
 
100); before that, the pulse was
taken on nine different arteries: three in the head, three on the
hands and three in the legs, as described in 
Chapter 20
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’: ‘
 
There are three areas in the body, each area is
divided into three which makes nine regions: these are used to
determine life and death [i.e. prognosis], and in them, 100 diseases
manifest, Deficiency and Excess are regulated and the pathogenic
factors can be expelled.’
 
1
The ‘nine regions’ are the arteries where the pulse is felt and
which reflect the state of the Upper, Middle and Lower Burners;
each of these three areas is divided into three regions identified
with Heaven, Person and Earth to indicate Upper, Middle and
Lower regions as indicated in 
Table 49.1
 
.
1038
Table 49.1
The nine regions of the pulse from the ‘Simple Question’
Although this method of taking the pulse on nine different
arteries and in nine different places was superseded by that of
taking only the pulse of the radial artery, feeling the pulses of the
nine regions may still be useful in clinical practice to confirm the
Emptiness or Fullness of a particular area. For example, in a
patient suffering from hypertension caused by the rising of Liver-
Yang, it may be useful to check the pulses of the upper regions to
determine the degree and severity of this pathology (the stronger,
harder and fuller the pulses of the upper regions, the more severe
is the rising of Liver-Yang).
Another example of the use of the pulses of the nine regions is
in patients with circulatory problems in the legs; in this case, it
may be useful to feel the pulses of the lower regions to establish
the degree of severity of this problem (the weaker and emptier the
pulses of the lower regions, the poorer is the circulation of Qi in
the lower legs). Furthermore, this method may be particularly
important if taking the pulse of a patient whose arm or leg has
been amputated; in such a case the three pulses of the radial artery
of the missing limb may be replaced by the nine regions from the
‘Simple Questions’.
THE PULSE IN THE ‘CLASSIC OF
DIFFICULTIES’
The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ (
AD
 
100) established for the first time
1039
the practice of taking the pulse at the radial artery; this pulse was
variously called 
Qi Kou
 
(‘Portal of Qi’), 
Cun Kou
 
(‘Portal of Inch
[Front pulse position]’) and 
Mai Kou
 
(‘Portal of Pulse’). The
‘Classic of Difficulties’ says:
The 12 main channels have their own arteries but the pulse can be
taken only at the Portal of Inch [LU-9 position] reflecting the life
and death of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs … The Portal of Inch is
the beginning and end point of the energy of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang
organs and that is why we can take the pulse at this position only.
 
2
The last part of this statement is interesting since the
description of the pulse of the Portal of Inch as the ‘beginning and
end point of the energy of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs’ seems to
imply an understanding of the circulation of blood as a closed
circuit.
There are two main reasons why the pulse is felt at the ‘Qi
Portal’ position on the radial artery by the wrist in correspondence
with the Lung channel. First of all, the Lungs govern Qi and this
channel is therefore the best to gauge the state of Qi in the body.
In fact, 
Chapter 1
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ says:
Twelve channels have places where a pulse can be felt and yet one
selects only the Inch Portal to determine the state of the 5 Yin and 6
Yang organs, why is this? The Inch Portal constitutes the great
meeting place of the vessels, it is the place where the pulse of the
Hand Greater Yin [Lungs] beats … the Inch Portal is the beginning
and end of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs and therefore only the Inch
Portal is used [for diagnosis].
 
3
Secondly, Postnatal Qi and Blood are derived from food and
water entering the Stomach. The Stomach extracts the essences of
food, which go to the Lungs; from the Lungs, they go to the skin
and the five Yin and six Yang organs and to all the arteries in the
body; this is a reason why LU-9 Taiyuan is the Gathering point of
all blood vessels. The ‘Simple Questions’ says in 
Chapter 11
 
:
The Yellow Emperor asked: why is it that one can tell the state of
1040
the 5 Yin organs only from the Qi Portal? Chi Po replied: the
Stomach is the Sea of Food and Drink and the great origin of the 6
Yang organs. The five flavours enter the mouth and are stored in
the Stomach which nourishes the Qi of the 5 Yin organs; the Qi
Portal is the Greater Yin. The flavours of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang
organs are all derived from the Stomach and then transformed to
become visible at the Qi Portal.
 
4
Chapter 21
 
of the same text says:
The Qi of food enters the Stomach, Food-Qi goes to the Heart and
its refined part enters the vessels, the Qi of the vessels flows into
the 12 channels and the Qi of the channels reaches the Lungs. The
Lungs govern all vessels and their refined essence goes to the skin
and body hair. The body hair and vessels combine together and Qi is
transmitted to the 6 Yang organs whose Qi is manifested and
nourishes the four Yin organs [apart from the Heart]. When Qi is
in balance, the Qi Portal becomes the Inch Portal [i.e. the pulse
position] from which the state of the body can be determined.
 
5
Thus, the section of radial artery on the Lung channel can tell us
about the state of Qi and Blood of the whole body (
Box 49.1
 
).
 
BOX 49.1
 
   
 
WHY THE PULSE IS FELT ON
THE RADIAL ARTERY (LUNG
CHANNEL)
• 
 
The Lungs govern Qi
• 
 
The Lungs receive the Food-Qi from the Stomach
Dr J. H. F. Shen has an interesting further idea why the pulse is
felt at the radial artery by the wrist. He compares the blood
flowing in the radial artery by the wrist with a sea wave and the
metacarpal bone of the thumb with a cliff: because the wave of
blood in the radial artery crashes against the cliff and is pushed
back, we can feel the pulse here. If the blood did not encounter
1041
this obstacle, it would flow through undeflected and we would not
be able to interpret it in the same way (
Fig. 49.1
 
).
FIG. 49.1
 
The radial artery pulse according to Dr Shen
THE THREE SECTIONS OF THE
PULSE
The three pulse sections are as follows:
Inch (
Cun
 
)
Front
Gate (
Guan
 
)
Middle
Foot (
Chi
 
)
Rear
The second chapter of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ explains how
its author arrived at feeling the pulse at the three positions called
Inch or Front, Gate or Middle and Foot or Rear (Cun, Guan and
Chi):
The Foot and Inch sections of the pulse are the meeting point of the
channels. The distance from the Gate position [LU-8, level with the
radial apophysis] to the Foot position in the elbow represents the
1042
Foot-Interior and it reflects the Yin energies. The distance from the
Gate position to the point Fish Margin [the thenar eminence] is the
Foot-Exterior and it reflects the Yang energies. Hence, the distance
of 1 inch is separated from the distance of 1 foot [from the Gate
position to the elbow crease], so that the distance of 1 foot is
represented by 1 inch. Hence the Yin energies are reflected within
that 1-inch section of the foot-long section and the Yang energies are
reflected within a 9-fen [nine-tenths of an inch] section of the Inch
section. The total length of the Foot and Inch section extends over 1
inch and 9 fen; hence one speaks of Foot and Inch sections.
 
6
In other words, the distance from the Gate-
Guan
 
(or Middle)
position of the pulse (on LU-8 Jingqu) to the crease of the elbow
measures one Chinese foot and reflects the Yin energies; the
distance from the Gate-
Guan
 
position to the crease of the wrist is 9
fen
 
(nine-tenths of an inch) and reflects the Yang energies.
However, a 1-inch section is separated from the 1-foot distance
from the Gate-
Guan
 
position to the elbow crease to represent the
Yin energies; in other words, 
this 1-inch section is representative of
the 1-foot section (
Fig. 49.2
 
).
FIG. 49.2
 
Inch, Gate and Foot pulse sections from the ‘Classic of
Difficulties’
The ‘Pulse Classic’ says something similar:
From the Fish Margin [the thenar eminence] to the prominent bone
1043
[the radial styloid process] moving one inch backwards
[proximally], in the middle of this is the Inch Portal. From the Inch
to the Foot, it is called Chi Ze and this position is called Foot. The
position behind the Inch and in front of the Foot positions, is called
Gate position: this is the boundary between the emerging Yang [at
the Inch position] and submerging Yin [at the Foot position].
Emerging Yang occupies three divisions [positions] and submerging
Yin also occupies three divisions [positions]. Yang originates at the
Foot position and moves [or manifests] in the Inch position; Yin
originates in the Inch position and moves [or manifests] in the Foot
position. The Inch position governs the Upper Burner including the
skin and hair up to the hands; the Gate position governs the Middle
Burner including the abdomen and back; the Foot position governs
the Lower Burner including the lower abdomen up to the feet.
 
7
The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ says in 
Chapter 3
 
: ‘
 
In front [i.e.
distal] of the Gate position Yang moves, the pulse here is 9 fen long
and superficial … behind [i.e. proximal to] the Gate position Yin
moves, the pulse here is 1 cun long and is deep.
 
’.
 
8
Thus, three sections of the pulse are identified: the Inch-
Cun
(Front) section reflecting the Yang energies, and the Gate-
Guan
(Middle) section and the Foot-
Chi
 
(Rear) section reflecting the Yin
energies, (
Box 49.2
 
).
 
BOX 49.2
 
   
 
THE THREE POSITIONS OF
THE PULSE
• 
 
The Inch-
Cun
 
(Front) position reflects the Yang
energies
• 
 
The Gate-
Guan
 
(Middle) and Foot-
Chi
 
(Rear) positions
reflect the Yin energies
Three different types of finger pressure are applied to each
section, making up the ‘nine regions’, which share the same name
with but have a different meaning from those of the ‘Simple
Questions’ listed above. This was the revolution brought to pulse
1044
diagnosis by the ‘Classic of Difficulties’: the same information that
could be gained by feeling the pulse on nine separate arteries in
the head, hands and legs, could now be gained by feeling the pulse
at the radial artery only.
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ describes the three
different pressures applied to the pulse:
There are three sections, Inch, Gate and Foot, and three pressures,
superficial, middle and deep [which makes] 9 regions. The Upper
section pertains to Heaven and reflects diseases from the chest to the
head; the Middle section pertains to Person and reflects diseases
from the dia-phragm to the umbilicus; the Lower section pertains to
Earth and reflects diseases from the umbilicus to the feet. [One
must] examine [these sections] before needling.
 
9
This passage establishes clearly the principle, adopted by all
successive doctors, that the Inch section of the pulse corresponds
to the Upper Burner and diseases from the chest upwards, the
Gate section to the Middle Burner and diseases from the
diaphragm tothe umbilicus, and the Foot section to the Lower
Burner and diseases from the umbilicus to the feet (
Fig. 49.3
 
).
1045
FIG. 49.3
 
Correspondence of three sections to the Three Burners
ASSIGNMENT OF PULSE POSITIONS
TO ORGANS
I shall discuss the assignment of pulse positions to organs by
examining the various pulse arrangements over the ages, and then
trying to reconcile the discrepancies between the various
arrangements.
Organ Positions On The Pulse
Besides attributing the three sections of the pulse to the Three
Burners, Chinese pulse diagnosis goes much further in assigning
each pulse position to the Qi of a particular organ. Through the
centuries, Chinese doctors have disagreed over such assignment
and many different opinions exist. 
Table 49.2
 
summarizes the
assignment of pulse positions to various organs, according to six
representative major classics:
 
1046
Table 49.2
Assignment of organs to pulse positions by different
authors
• 
 
‘The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’
(
Huang Di Nei Jing
 
), c. 100
BC
• 
 
‘The Classic of Difficulties’ (
Nan Jing
 
), c. 
AD
 
100
• 
 
‘The Pulse Classic’ (
Mai Jing
 
) by Wang Shu He, c. 
AD
280
 
• 
 
‘The Study of the Pulse from Pin Hu Lake’ (
Pin Hu
Mai Xue
 
) by Li Shi Zhen, 1564
• 
 
‘The Complete Works of Jing Yue’ (
Jing Yue Quan Shu
 
)
by Zhang Jing Yue, 1624
• 
 
‘The Golden Mirror of Medicine’ (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
) by
Wu Qian, 1742.
It is worth reporting the actual passages concerning the
correlation between organs and pulse positions from some of the
classics to show how such correlation has never been so simple
and mechanical as what tends to be taught today, that is, that we
feel the ‘Yang organs at the superficial level and Yin organs at the
deep level’.
1047
Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
 
, 
AD
 
100)
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ explains the
correspondence of pulse positions to organs (or channels) in
accordance with the five Elements in a rather complex statement:
The Hand Greater Yin [Lungs] and the Hand Bright Yang [Large
Intestine] pertain to Metal; the Foot Lesser Yin [Kidneys] and Foot
Greater Yang [Bladder] pertain to Water. Metal generates Water,
Water flows downwards and cannot ascend. Therefore, these are felt
at the position below 
the Gate position [i.e. Foot position]. The Foot
Terminal Yin [Liver] and the Foot Lesser Yang [Gall-Bladder]
pertain to Wood; Wood generates the Fire of the Hand Greater Yang
[Small Intestine] and Hand Lesser Yin [Heart]. Fire blazes
upwards and cannot descend. Hence, the Hand Greater Yang [Small
Intestine] and Hand Lesser Yin [Heart] correspond to the position
above the Gate [i.e. the Inch position]. The Fire of the Hand Heart
Master [i.e. Pericardium] and Lesser Yang [Triple Burner] generates
the Earth of Foot Greater Yin [Spleen] and Foot Bright Yang
[Stomach], Earth governs the Centre and its position is therefore
the central one. This is in accordance with the Five-Element
Mother–Child mutual generating and nourishing relationship.
 
10
Thus, the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ assignment of organs to pulse
positions follows strictly the Generating cycle of the Five Elements
as follows (
Fig. 49.4
 
):
1048
FIG. 49.4
 
(a) Five-Element influence on correspondence between
organs and (b) pulse position in the ‘Classic of Difficulties’
1049
Left
Right
Small Intestine/Heart
Lungs/Large Intestine
Gall-Bladder/Liver
Spleen/Stomach
Bladder/Kidneys
Pericardium/Triple Burner
It is interesting to note that this strict assignment of organs to
pulse positions according to the Five Elements and the assignment
of the right Foot (Rear) position to the Pericardium and Triple
Burner would suggest that the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ assigns
channels rather than organs to the pulse positions. Thus, the
arrangement of pulse positions in the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ is
seen clearly from the acupuncturist’s perspective rather than the
herbalist’s and this would confirm that the two main pulse
arrangements, that is, one with the Small Intestine and Large
Intestine on the Front and the other with them on the Rear
position, reflect the different perspectives of the acupuncturist and
herbalist, as discussed in more detail below.
Pulse Classic (Mai Jing, 
AD
 
280)
The ‘Pulse Classic’ discusses the correspondence of pulse
positions to organs (or channels) in 
Chapter 7
 
. It says:
The Heart position is assigned to the left Cun [which is] distal to
the Gate position. The Heart is the Hand Lesser Yin and is
exteriorly–interiorly related to the Hand Great Yang, i.e. the Small
Intestine. The Liver position is assigned to the left gate position.
The Liver is the Foot Terminal Yin and is exteriorly–interiorly
related to the Foot 
Lesser Yang, i.e. the Gall-Bladder. The Kidneys
position is assigned to the left Foot position which is proximal to
the Gate position. The Kidneys are the Foot Lesser Yin which is
exteriorly–interiorly related with the Foot Greater Yang, i.e. the
Bladder. The Lungs position is assigned to the right Cun position,
distal to the Gate position. The Lungs are the Hand Greater Yin
and are exteriorly–interiorly related to the Hand Bright Yang, i.e.
the Large Intestine. The Spleen position is assigned to the right
Guan position. The Spleen is the Foot Greater Yin which is
exteriorly–interiorly related to the Foot Bright Yang, i.e. the
Stomach. The Kidneys position is assigned to the right Foot
1050
position, proximal to the Gate position. The Kidneys are the Foot
Lesser Yin which is exteriorly–interiorly related to the Foot Greater
Yang, i.e. the Bladder. The Kidneys and Bladder meet in the Lower
Burner at a point to the right of Guan Yuan [Ren-4]: to the left of
this point are the Kidneys, to the right the Uterus also called Triple
Burner.
 
11
The last part of this statement is of note as it seems to assign
both left and right Rear positions to the Kidneys and Bladder,
while the Rear position reflects also the Uterus and Triple Burner.
Most authors translate the end of the above passage as meaning
that the left Rear position corresponds to the Kidneys and the
right Rear one to the Uterus and Triple Burner; I personally think
that ‘right’ and ‘left’ at the end of the above passage refer to right
and left of Ren-4 Guanyuan. In conclusion, the pulse arrangement
from the ‘Pulse Classic’ is:
Left
Right
Small Intestine/Heart
Lungs/Large Intestine
Gall-Bladder/Liver
Spleen/Stomach
Bladder/Kidneys
Kidneys/Uterus/Triple Burner/Bladder
The association between Uterus and Triple Burner is interesting
as it confirms the statement from 
Chapter 66
 
of the ‘Classic of
Difficulties’, according to which the Original Qi stems from the
space between the two kidneys (and therefore also the Uterus in
women) and it spreads to the five Yin and six Yang organs via the
intermediary of the Triple Burner.
The ‘Study of the Pulse from Pin Hu Lake’ (
Pin Hu Mai
Xue
 
, 1564)
The ‘Study of the Pulse from Pin Hu Lake’ assigns only the Yin
organs to the pulse positions:
‘The Heart and Liver are on the left and Lungs and Spleen on the
right. The Kidneys and Gate of life [Ming Men] are at the Foot
position on left and right.’
 
12
The ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’ (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
,
1051
1742)
The ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’ by Wu Qian assigns the pulse
positions to the organs as follows:
Left
Right
‘External’/‘Internal’
‘Internal’/‘External’
Shanzhong/Heart
Lungs/Centre of thorax
Gall-Bladder/Liver
Spleen/Stomach
Bladder, Small Intestine/Kidneys
Kidneys/Large Intestine
Figure 49.5
 
is a reproduction of the diagram from the original
text and 
Figure 49.6
 
is a translation of the same.
 
13
FIG. 49.5
 
Pulse diagram from the ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’
1052
FIG. 49.6
 
Translation of pulse diagram from the ‘Golden Mirror of
Medicine’
The diagram from the ‘Golden Mirror of Medicine’ clearly shows
that ‘external’ and ‘internal’ mean distal and proximal respectively:
this means that the Yang and Yin organs within each position are
felt at the distal and proximal ends respectively. This is discussed
in greater depth below.
Modern China
The most common pulse assignment in modern China is as
follows:
Left
Right
‘External’/‘Internal’
‘Internal’/‘External’
Pericardium/Heart
Lungs
Gall-Bladder/Liver
Spleen/Stomach
Small Intestine/Bladder/Kidney-Yin
Kidney-Yang/Large Intestine
1053
Such assignment of pulse positions to organs is something that I
have deduced from the various teachers I learned with in China as
modern books do not usually present this information in a clear
form. This is probably due to the fact that there has been
considerable disagreement on this over the centuries and modern
books tend therefore to gloss over this. For example, ‘Chinese
Acupuncture and Moxibustion’ of 1987 does not even give any
assignment of pulse positions to organs.
 
14
 
Other texts often
overlook the assignment of the Small and Large Intestine organs
as this is the subject of more disagreement: for exam-ple, the
‘Fundamentals of Chinese Medicine’ (a translation of a Chinese
text) of 1985 says: ‘
 
The right Inch pulse is associated with the
Lungs, and the right Barrier pulse is associated with the Stomach
and Spleen. The left Inch pulse is associated with the Heart, and the
left Barrier pulse is associated with the Liver and Gall-Bladder. The
Kidney and Bladder are reflected in both Cubit pulses.
 
’
 
15
Reconciling Different Pulse Arrangements
Although different pulse assignments may seem contradictory,
there is a common thread running through them. It is generally
agreed that the Front position reflects the Upper Burner, the
Middle position the Middle Burner and the Rear position the
Lower Burner. Generally, the main discrepancies occur with the
assignment of the Yang organs and especially the Small and Large
Intestine. Indeed, many doctors do not assign the Yang organs to
the pulse at all (the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’
does not).
Yin and Yang organ as reflected on the pulse
The commonly held assumption that the superficial level reflects
the state of the Yang organs and the deep level that of the Yin
organs has never been the only one in Chinese medicine. In fact,
the different levels (or different places) where the Yang and Yin
organs are felt are often described as 
wai
 
(external) and 
nei
(internal) and ‘external’ and ‘internal’ may be interpreted in three
ways:
 
• 
 
‘external’ meaning superficial and ‘internal’ meaning
1054
deep level
• 
 
‘external’ meaning lateral and ‘internal’ meaning
medial
• 
 
‘external’ meaning distal and ‘internal’ meaning
proximal.
The first interpretation is by far the most common today but it is
important to realize that it is not the only one and also that the
three interpretations are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, Dr J. H. F.
Shen often uses the second and third interpretations when reading
the pulse; this will be discussed later. 
Figure 49.7
 
illustrates the
three different ways of interpreting ‘external’ and ‘internal’.
FIG. 49.7
 
Meanings of ‘external’ and ‘internal’ in pulse taking
In any case, the relationship between Yin and Yang organs as
1055
reflected on the pulse needs to be interpreted dynamically and not
mechanically; we should not simply assign the superficial level to
the Yang organs and the deep level to the Yin ones, for example on
the 
left Middle position the Gall-Bladder on the superficial level
and the Liver on the deep level. As the relationship between the
paired Yin and Yang organs is very close (except for the Small
Intestine/Heart and Large Intestine/Lung, which will be discussed
shortly), each individual pulse position should be first analysed as
a whole, paying attention to the intensity and the level of the
pulse, rather than mechanically feeling the ‘Gall-Bladder’ on the
superficial level and the ‘Liver’ on the deep level as two separate
entities.
Each pulse position can reflect different phenomena in different
situations. For example, let us consider the left Middle position
(Liver and Gall-Bladder): in a state of health, the Liver and Gall-
Bladder will be balanced or, to put it differently, Yin and Yang
within the Liver/Gall-Bladder sphere are balanced. In this case, the
pulse will be relatively soft and smooth and not particularly
superficial or deep and the Gall-Bladder influence on the pulse will
not be felt. But if Liver-Yang is in excess and rises upwards
affecting the Gall-Bladder channel (causing severe temporal
headaches), the rising Qi will be reflected on the pulse, which will
be Wiry (harder than normal) and more superficial (it will be felt
pounding under the finger). In interpreting this pulse we can say
that Liver-Yang is rising or, to put it differently, that the Gall-
Bladder Qi is in excess.
The acupuncturist’s and herbalist’s perspectives in
pulse diagnosis
One of the possible explanations for the different pulse
arrangements is the therapeutic approach of the practitioner, that
is, the acupuncturist or the herbalist. Given that the pulse reflects
the Qi of both organ and channel, acupuncturists working on the
channels would naturally assign the Small Intestine and Large
Intestine to the same positions as the Heart and Lungs
respectively to which their channels are paired. Herbalists, on the
contrary, would give more importance to the Internal Organs
rather than the channels and therefore assign the Small and Large
1056
Intestine to the Rear positions, that is, the Lower Burner where
their organs are located.
Small and Large Intestine channels versus organs in
pulse diagnosis
The Small and Large Intestine are probably the subject of the
widest discrepancies in pulse diagnosis because they are
sometimes placed on the Front and sometimes on the Rear
position. This discrepancy may be explained by the fact that the
connection between these two organs and their channels is
somewhat looser than that of other organs. In fact, the Small and
Large Intestine organs are in the Lower Burner while their
channels are in the arms (the organs of the Upper Burner have
their channels in the arm, whereas the organs of the Middle and
Lower Burner have their channels in the legs). Furthermore, the
functions of the intestinal organs do not correspond closely to
those of their channels; in fact, although the arm points of the
Small and Large Intestine can of course be used for intestinal
problems, their chief clinical application is to treat problems of the
neck, shoulders, face and head as well as external invasions of
Wind.
Thus, the same pulse quality in the specific example of the Front
position could mean two different things in different situations.
For example, if the right Front position (Lung) is quite superficial,
slightly big and slightly Rapid, this could indicate an emotional
upset affecting the Lungs. Here, the pulse reflects the state of the
Lungs. But on another occasion exactly the same type of pulse may
indicate something quite different when, for example, the patient
has an acute, large, purulent tooth abscess. In such a case, the
pulse reflects the state of the Large Intestine channel (where the
abscess is) rather than a problem with the Lung organ. On the
other hand, problems with the Large Intestine 
organ
 
(rather than
channel) more often manifest on the Rear position of the pulse
and often on both sides. For example, in patients suffering from
ulcerative colitis nearly always the Rear position of both sides is
very Wiry, reflecting the Heat and stagnation in the Large
Intestine. Thus, from these two examples (tooth abscess and
ulcerative colitis) we can see how the contradictory assignments of
1057
the Large Intestine to the right Front and right Rear positions can
both
 
be right.
Clinical significance of pulse diagnosis irrespective of
organ positions
We should not make too much of the different pulse positions
assumed by different doctors and we should not view the
relationship between pulse positions and organs mechanically. In
fact, it would be perfectly possible to make a good, clinically
significant pulse diagnosis without referring to the Internal
Organs at all. This is because the pulse gives us an idea of the
relative strength of Qi in the Three Burners, at the three levels and
on left and right sides.
The pulse essentially reflects the state of Qi in the different
Burners and at different energetic levels which are dependent on
the pathological condition. We need 
to interpret the pulse
dynamically rather than mechanically. The most important thing is
to appraise how Qi is flowing, what is the relationship between Yin
and Yang on the pulse (i.e. is there Deficiency or Excess of Yin or
Yang), at what level is Qi flowing (i.e. is the pulse superficial or
deep), and whether the body’s Qi is deficient and whether there is
an attack by an external pathogenic factor.
 
The pulse gives us clinically relevant information, even
without reference to organ positions.
Clinical interpretation of the pulse in acute versus
chronic conditions
The clinical relevance of the assignment of pulse positions to
organs differs in acute and chronic conditions. In acute conditions,
especially in fevers, after operations, during infections, etc., the
assessment of the individual pulse positions is somewhat less
important than that of its overall quality and rate. For example, if a
person suffers a severe invasion of Wind, the pulse will be Floating
in all the positions and, of course, this does not indicate a
pathology in each of the organs corresponding to those positions.
1058
The pulse as a reflection of Heart-Qi
Although each pulse position can be assigned to a particular
Internal Organ or channel, we should not lose sight of the fact that
the pulse as a whole reflects the state of Heart-Qi and Heart-Blood:
the Heart governs Blood and the blood vessels and it is therefore
natural that a disharmony of the Heart may reflect on the pulse 
as
a whole
 
. The influence of the Heart on the pulse as a whole is
particularly manifest when the pulse is extremely Weak, Fine or
Choppy, or, conversely, Overflowing, in 
all
 
positions, and also
when it is very Slow or very Rapid.
Furthermore, any irregularity of the pulse (Knotted, Hasty,
Hurried, Intermittent) always indicates a Heart disharmony,
whatever the other Internal Organs that may be involved.
Frequently, but by no means always, the above pulse qualities may
indicate not only a Heart disharmony in the Chinese sense, but
possibly also a heart problem in a Western sense. For example, a
congenital heart defect may manifest with one of the above
qualities.
The clinical significance of pulse diagnosis in heart problems is
discussed further below.
 
Independently of positions, the pulse as a whole
reflects Heart-Qi.
THE THREE LEVELS
When feeling the pulse one should apply three different pressures
to feel three different levels of energy: the superficial level is felt
with a very light pressure and corresponds to Qi, Yang and the
Yang organs, the deep level is felt with a heavy pressure and
corresponds to Yin and the Yin organs; and the middle level is felt
in between the two levels with a moderate pressure and
corresponds to Blood.
The clinical significance of the three levels is summarized in
Table 49.3
 
.
1059
Table 49.3
Correspondence of three levels of the pulse to Yang and Yin
energies (Li Shi Zhen)
The correlation that relates the superficial level to Qi and Yang,
the middle level to Blood and the deep level to Yin is clinically
important. This distinction, is after all, implicit in many of the
pulse qualities; for example, when we say that a pulse is Weak we
mean that it is weak at the superficial level and it therefore
indicates deficiency of Yang; when we say that a pulse is Floating-
Empty we mean that it is weak at the deep level and it therefore
indicates Yin deficiency; when we say that a pulse is Hollow we
mean that it is empty at the middle level and it therefore indicates
deficiency of Blood.
The above three examples all refer to a deficiency of energy at
the three levels. Of course, the pulse can also be too strong at each
of those levels. For example, a Floating pulse is too superficial and
it therefore indicates ‘Excess of Yang’, which may be external (as
Wind is a Yang pathogenic factor) or internal; a Firm pulse is by
definition full, strong and hard at the middle and deep levels and
it may therefore indicate Blood stasis or 
Blood-Heat; a Deep and
Full pulse indicates the presence of a pathogenic factor in the
Interior and therefore in the Yin energy. The clinical significance of
the strength of the pulse at each level is summarized in 
Table 49.4
 
,
which also indicates the pulse qualities corresponding to each
level.
1060
Table 49.4
Clinical significance of the pulse strength at the three levels
Level
Weak
Strong
Superficial
Yang or Qi deficiency (Deep,
Weak, Soggy, Hidden)
Excess of Yang, invasion of external pathogenic
factor (Floating, Big, Overflowing, Wiry)
Middle
Blood deficiency (Choppy,
Leather, Hollow, Scattered)
Blood-Heat or Blood stasis (Firm, Wiry, Slippery, Big,
Overflowing)
Deep
Yin deficiency (Floating-Empty,
Leather, Scattered)
Internal Cold or internal Heat, stasis in the Yin organs
(Deep, Full, Slippery, Wiry, Firm, Tight)
Another way of interpreting the three levels is that given by Li
Shi Zhen, who correlates the superficial, middle and deep levels
with the energy of Lungs and Heart, Stomach and Spleen, and
Liver and Kidneys respectively (
Table 49.3
 
). This means that,
according to his theory, the whole of the superficial level
(irrespective of positions) reflects the state of the Lung and Heart,
the whole of the middle level reflects the state of the Stomach and
Spleen, and the whole of the deep level (irrespective of position)
reflects the state of the Liver and Kidneys; this thinking is certainly
clinically useful especially when the pulse displays the same
quality in all positions. For example, if the pulse is Empty at the
deep level in all positions, we can certainly deduce that there is a
deficiency of Yin of the Liver and Kidneys; that does not mean to
say, of course, that other organs may not have Yin deficiency but if,
say, there was a deficiency of Yin of the Lungs, the pulse would be
Empty at the deep level only in the Lung position. The idea that
the three different levels can be correlated to the energy of
different organs is actually very old and is present in both the
‘Classic of Difficulties’ and the ‘Pulse Classic’.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ (
Mai Jing
 
) says:
Initially one should apply the pressure [equivalent to] 3 soya beans
and [this level corresponds to] skin and hair and to the energy of
the Lungs; with the pressure equivalent to 6 soya beans, it
corresponds to blood vessels and the energy of the Heart; with the
pressure equivalent to 9 soya beans it corresponds to the muscles
and the energy of the Spleen; with the pressure equivalent to 12
soya beans it corresponds to the sinews and the energy of the Liver;
finally, pressing down to the bone and then releasing the pressure,
1061
if the pulse comes fast, it corresponds to the energy of the Kidneys.
 
16
Wang Shu He (author of the ‘Pulse Classic’) obviously relied
here on the description in the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ which has a
passage that is almost identical in 
Chapter 5
 
.
 
17
It should be noted that some pulse qualities (Wiry, Slippery, Big,
Overflowing, etc.) manifest of course at more than one level.
METHOD OF PULSE TAKING
There are four aspects to the method of taking the pulse:
 
• 
 
time
• 
 
levelling the arm
• 
 
equalizing the breathing
• 
 
placing the fingers.
Time
In theory the best time to take the pulse is in the early morning
when the Yin is calm and the Yang has not yet stirred; it is also the
time when the pulse is not affected by work, eating, emotions, etc.
The ‘Simple Questions’ explains why the early morning is the best
time to take the pulse: 
‘Normally the pulse should be taken in the
morning when Yin Qi has not stirred yet [not yet decreased after the
night], Yang Qi is not yet dispersed [not yet emerged after the
night], the patient has not eaten yet, the main channels are not yet
full, the Connecting channels are balanced, and Qi and Blood are
balanced.’
 
18
 
Obviously this is not possible in clinical practice and
we should therefore bear in mind the various factors that could
affect the pulse in the short term, that is, hurrying at work,
hurrying to get to the clinic, having just had a meal or being in a
state of hunger, an emotional upset, etc.
Levelling The Arm
The patient’s arm should be horizontal and should not be held
1062
higher than the level of the heart. If the patient is lying down, the
arm should be resting on the couch; 
it should 
not
 
be bent, resting
on the patient’s body (
Fig. 49.8
 
). If the patient is sitting, the arm
should be resting comfortably on the table. In China, this is the
most common way of taking the pulse, using a small soft cushion
for the patient to rest his or her wrist on.
FIG. 49.8
 
Patient’s arm position when taking the pulse: (a) sitting;
(b) lying down
Equalizing The Breathing
Traditionally, equalizing the breathing was necessary to determine
whether the pulse was Slow or Rapid, by relating it to the
practitioner’s breathing cycle: if the patient’s pulse beats three
times or less per practitioner’s breathing cycle, it is Slow; if it beats
five times or more, it is Rapid. This method is not used nowadays
because we can make use of a watch to count the rate of a pulse;
however, ‘equalizing the breathing’ is still a useful procedure
because it facilitates the practitioner’s necessary relaxation and
1063
concentration.
Placing The Fingers
Placing the fingers involves five aspects, as follows:
 
• 
 
placing the fingers
• 
 
arranging the fingers
• 
 
regulating the fingers
• 
 
using the fingers
• 
 
moving the fingers
– 
 
lifting
– 
 
pressing
– 
 
searching
– 
 
pushing
– 
 
rolling.
Placing the fingers
Placing the fingers means that the practitioner’s three fingers
(index, middle and ring fingers) are placed simultaneously on the
radial artery to make an initial assessment of the strength, level
and quality of the pulse. To assess individual positions, it may be
necessary to lift two of the fingers slightly, while interpreting the
pulse with the third finger. Usually, one feels the pulse of the
patient’s right arm with one’s left hand and vice versa (
Fig. 49.9
 
)
and the index, middle and ring fingers are placed on the Front,
Middle and Rear positions respectively.
1064
FIG. 49.9
 
Placing the fingers when taking the pulse
Arranging the fingers
Arranging the fingers means that the practitioner should either
spread the fingers slightly or press them 
close together according
to the size of the patient’s arm. For example, when feeling the
pulse of a 10-year-old child, we should press our fingers closer
together to feel the three positions; the younger the child, the
closer together our fingers should be and, in a baby under a year
old, we feel the three positions with a single finger (by rolling it
proximally and distally to feel the Rear and Front positions
respectively). When taking the pulse of a very tall man, we should
spread the fingers out slightly to feel the three positions.
Regulating the fingers
Regulating the fingers means that the practitioner should place
the fingertips on the three positions, allowing for the different
length of the fingers. In other words, the middle finger, being the
longest, is slightly contracted. To feel the pulse, the pads rather
than the tips of the fingers are used (
Fig. 49.10
 
).
1065
FIG. 49.10
 
Using the pads of the fingers to take the pulse
Using the fingers
Using the fingers means that the practitioner should bear in mind
the subtle difference in sensitivity between the three fingers.
Generally, the ring finger is slightly more sensitive than the others
and we should take this into account when comparing the
different strengths of the three positions; however, the difference
in sensitivity is very small and not too important in clinical
practice.
Moving the fingers
Moving the fingers means that the fingers should be moved in
various directions when feeling the pulse. It is a common
misconception that the pulse is felt by keeping the fingers
absolutely still for a long time; in fact, the fingers are kept still
only when counting the rate of the pulse to decide whether it is
Slow, Rapid or normal. The movements are five (
Box 49.3
 
).
 
BOX 49.3
 
   
 
THE FIVE MOVEMENTS
• 
 
Lifting
 
: this consists of gently lifting the fingers to
check the strength of the pulse at the superficial level
and therefore whether the pulse is Floating, normal or
deficient at that level.
• 
 
Pressing
 
: this consists of gently pressing the fingers
downwards to check the strength of the pulse at the
middle and deep levels and therefore whether the pulse
is Deep, normal or deficient at these levels: this is
1066
necessary to determine whether the pulse is Deep,
Hollow, Hidden or empty at the deep level.
• 
 
Searching
 
: this consists of not moving the fingers but
keeping them still to count the rate of the pulse, to
decide whether it is Slow, Rapid or normal.
• 
 
Pushing
 
: this consists of gently moving the fingers
from side to side (lateral-medial) in each position (
Fig.
49.11
 
). This movement is necessary to interpret many
pulse qualities, such as Slippery, Wiry, Leather, Tight,
Choppy, Fine, Minute, etc. One can only identify these
pulse qualities by moving the fingers in this way in
order to feel 
around
 
the pulse: it is only by feeling round
the pulse that we can determine its shape.
FIG. 49.11
 
Pushing the fingers from side to side
• 
 
Rolling
 
: this consists of moving the fingers back and
forth (proximal-distal) in each position (
Fig. 49.12
 
): this
movement is necessary to determine whether the pulse
is Short, Long or Moving or to read the pulse of a child
under 1 year old.
1067
FIG. 49.12
 
Rolling the fingers
 
Remember: the pulse is not felt with the fingers totally
still but moving the fingers in four ways:
1. 
 
Lifting (upwards)
2. 
 
Pressing (downwards)
3. 
 
Pushing (from side to side)
4. 
 
Rolling (proximal–distal).
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PULSE
There is no such thing as a ‘standard’ normal pulse. A person’s
pulse varies according to many factors, all of which should be
taken into account.
The following factors affect the pulse:
 
• 
 
season
• 
 
gender
• 
 
age
• 
 
body build
• 
 
menstruation
1068
• 
 
pregnancy
• 
 
Fan Guan Mai
 
and 
Xie Fei Mai
 
.
Season
The pulse varies considerably according to the seasons (
Box 49.4
 
),
becoming relatively Wiry in the spring, Overflowing in the
summer, Soft in the autumn and Deep in the winter.
 
BOX 49.4
 
   
 
SEASONAL PULSES
• 
 
Spring: slightly Wiry
• 
 
Summer: superficial, Overflowing
• 
 
Autumn: soft
• 
 
Winter: Deep
In spring the pulse should be slightly Wiry, straight and
relatively Long. It was traditionally described as ‘feeling like the
tender tip of a bamboo pole’.
In summer the pulse should be more superficial than in other
seasons. It should feel round, slightly Slippery, coming forcefully
and disappearing quickly. It was traditionally described as feeling
like a hook or ‘a string of pearls’. In late summer, the pulse should
be relatively soft, light and relaxed and was traditionally described
as ‘feeling like the steps of a chicken’.
In autumn, the pulse should again be relatively soft, superficial,
light and relaxed. It was traditionally described as ‘feeling like a
group of seedlings sprouting together’.
In winter, the pulse should be deeper than at other seasons and
should feel relatively hard and round like a stone.
The normal seasonal pulses have been described in slightly
different ways in various passages from the classics. The ‘Classic of
Categories’ by Zhang Jing Yue (1624) describes the pulse in
springtime as round and Slippery, in summertime as Overflowing
and Big, in the autumn as Floating and like a hair and in
1069
wintertime as Deep and like a stone.
 
19
 
It also says that ‘
 
In
Springtime the pulse is floating like a fish swimming in the waves;
in Summertime it is at the skin level, flooding and full; in the
Autumn it is under the skin and like a hibernating worm about to
move; in Wintertime it is at the level of the bones and like a hidden
hibernating worm’.
 
20
The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 19
 
describes the normal
seasonal pulses as follows: ‘
 
In springtime the pulse is like a
bowstring … in summertime like a hook … in the autumn floating
… and in wintertime like a storage place.
 
’
 
21
The ‘Simple Questions’ describes the normal pulses in each
season by comparing them with various instruments for
measuring such as a ruler, the carpenter’s square, the steelyard
arm (the arm of a weighing scale) and the counterpoise weight: ‘
 
In
springtime the pulse should be like a ruler, in summertime like a
[carpenter’s] square, in the autumn like the arm of a steelyard and
in wintertime like a counterpoise [weight].
 
’
 
22
 
The analogy between
the seasonal pulses and the measuring instruments highlights the
idea of balance and harmony of the pulse with the changing
seasons. The modern commentary explains that in springtime the
pulse should be light, supple and Slippery, in summertime
Overflowing and relatively Rapid, in the autumn superficial and
relatively soft like hair and in wintertime like a stone and Deep.
Gender
Men’s pulses are relatively stronger than women’s in general.
There are two other differences between men’s and women’s
pulses. First, the left-side pulse is rather stronger than the right-
side pulse in men and vice versa in women; this is only a very
slight difference (some authors say it is about 8%). The ‘Pulse
Classic’ (
Chapter 7
 
) says: ‘
 
The left side [of the pulse] is big in men,
the right side is big in women.’
 
23
 
Li Shi Zhen also discusses the
differences between left and right: ‘
 
In men the left pulse should be
stronger, in women the right pulse should be stronger.’
 
24
Secondly, in men, the Front position is relatively stronger than
the Rear one and vice versa in women (
Box 49.5
 
). The ‘Classic of
Difficulties’ (
Chapter 19
 
) says: ‘
 
In men the pulse [is found] above
1070
the Middle position, in women below the Middle position. Thus,
men’s pulse is usually weak on the Rear position while women’s
pulse is strong on the Rear position: this is normal.’
 
25
 
Li Shi Zhen
says something similar in his book ‘The Study of the Pulse from
Pin Hu Lake’: 
‘There are differences in the Rear position in men and
women: in women, the Yang [i.e. the Front position] is weak and the
Yin [i.e. the Rear position] is strong.’
 
26
 
Qing dynasty’s Chen Jia
Yuan says:
 
BOX 49.5
 
   
 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
THE PULSES OF MEN AND WOMEN
• 
 
The left side is slightly stronger in men, the right in
women
• 
 
The Front positions are slightly stronger in men, the
Rear in women (not verified in my practice)
Men have less Yin and more Yang, women have less Yang and more
Yin. South corresponds to Fire and man, the two Front pulse
positions correspond to South and the original Yang, hence they are
big and overflowing while the two Rear positions are weak and soft.
Women correspond to North, and so the two Front pulse positions
are fine and weak while the two Rear positions are big.
 
27
Box 49.5
 
summarizes gender differences in the pulse according
to the classics.
It is interesting to note that this situation is hardly ever
encountered in practice as women’s pulses are more commonly
weak on the Rear position, perhaps indicating a decline of
hereditary Kidney strength compared with previous generations.
In my practice, from a database of more than 2500 patients, I have
found that 22% of women have a very weak pulse on both Rear
positions, as opposed to 4.6% of men.
 
Contrary to what the classics say, the Rear positions are
usually weaker in women than in men.
1071
Age
The pulse varies considerably with age, especially in its rate, being
faster in small children and slower in old people (see 
Chapter 50
 
).
Most Chinese books also say that the pulse is naturally weaker in
old people; I do not find this to be true in practice as in many
cases, the pulse of the elderly is often Full and Wiry. This is
because old people frequently suffer from Liver-Wind or Phlegm.
Body Build
The pulse should naturally be stronger, larger and longer in
robust, large people and weaker, smaller and shorter in small, frail
people. Thus, a pulse that would be judged to be too weak and
short in a robust man might be normal in a small, thin woman.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ says:
When diagnosing from the pulse one must take into account
whether the patient is large, small, tall or short and whether their
nature is placid or nervous. If the pulse, whether slow, rapid, big,
small, long or short, accords with the patient’s nature, it is normal;
if it does not accord with it, it is abnormal. The three pulse positions
tend to be of equal size. For example in a small-size person, or a
woman, or a thin person the pulse is small and soft.
 
28
Menstruation
In the week preceding the onset of the period, the pulse is slightly
Slippery, especially on the right Rear position. When the period
arrives, the pulse loses its Slippery quality and becomes relatively
Weak and maybe a bit slower.
Pregnancy
The pulse becomes Slippery during pregnancy; this quality is
therefore normal in pregnancy. The more advanced the pregnancy,
the more Slippery is the pulse. It is also normal for the Front and
Rear pulses to become stronger in pregnancy.
1072
Fan Guan Mai
 
And 
Xie Fei Mai
Fan Guan Mai
The radial artery is displaced in a small percentage of people
(about 5%) so that it lies on the dorsal rather than the inner aspect
of the arm (
Fig. 49.13
 
). This anatomical abnormality was called 
Fan
Guan Mai
 
in Chinese, meaning ‘pulse on the opposite gate’. In
such cases (which usually occur on one side only) we cannot
interpret the pulse properly and we should therefore refer to the
pulses of the nine regions on the head, hand and feet. Thus,
whenever the pulse cannot be felt at all, or can be felt only very
faintly, we should always check the dorsal aspect of the arm to see
if the artery is displaced, lest we deduce wrongly that the pulse is
very weak and almost non-existent.
FIG. 49.13
 
Fan Guan Mai
 
pulse
Xie Fei Mai
In a few individuals, the pulse runs from the Rear position
obliquely towards the Front position. This pulse was called 
Xie Fei
Mai
 
, which means Oblique-Flying Pulse. Like the Fan Guan Mai, it
is due to an irregularity of the radial artery which makes it difficult
to read and interpret the pulse properly.
Box 49.6
 
summarizes the factors affecting the pulse.
 
BOX 49.6
 
   
 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE
1073
PULSE
• 
 
Season
• 
 
Gender
• 
 
Age
• 
 
Body build
• 
 
Menstruation
• 
 
Pregnancy
• 
 
Fan Guan Mai
 
and 
Xie Fei Mai
ATTRIBUTES OF THE NORMAL
PULSE
The normal pulse has three attributes: ‘spirit’, ‘Stomach-Qi’ and
‘root’.
Spirit
The Chinese word used here is 
shen
 
, which is of course used very
frequently in the context of diagnosis to indicate a favourable
condition, a good prognosis. The word 
shen
 
is used in the context
of tongue diagnosis, facial and eye diagnosis. In the context of
pulse diagnosis, a pulse has ‘spirit’ when it is soft and gentle but
with strength. It also has ‘spirit’ when it is regular in rate and
‘orderly’ in quality. A pulse without ‘spirit’ is too hard, not soft, not
gentle, perhaps irregular and maybe also changing quality
frequently.
Stomach-Qi
The pulse has Stomach-Qi when it is relatively slow (Slowed-down,
i.e. four beats per breathing cycle), gentle, calm and relatively soft.
We feel the pulse on the radial artery along the Lung channel to
gauge the state of Qi and Blood of all the organs; however, the Qi
of the organs cannot reach the Lung channel without the force of
Stomach-Qi. As a Chinese textbook says, ‘
 
The food essences enter
the Stomach, Food-Qi goes to the Heart and the excess enters the
1074
blood vessels. The Qi of the blood vessels flows in the twelve
channels which are all under the control of the Lungs.’
 
29
 
This
means that Lung-Qi reflects the Qi of all the channels and blood
vessels and for this reason we can feel the pulse on the radial
artery along the Lung channel, but Lung-Qi relies on the motive
force and nourishment of Stomach-Qi to reach the channels and
blood vessels.
The Stomach has an important influence on the pulse as it is
from the Stomach that the motive force for the beating of the
Heart comes. Also, the beating of the left ventricle that can be felt
below and to the left of the left nipple is, in Chinese medicine, the
beating of 
Xu Li
 
, that is, the Great Connecting channel of the
Stomach. The Stomach is the Source of Post-Heaven Qi, the Sea of
Food, the source of Postnatal Qi and Blood and it therefore gives
‘body’ to the pulse; for this reason, a pulse that is not soft, too
hard, not gentle and not Slowed-down means that it has no
Stomach-Qi.
It is important not to confuse the quality of having ‘Stomach-Qi’
with the actual Stomach pulse as the former applies to all pulse
positions. Moreover, it is important to stress that ‘not having
Stomach-Qi’ does not necessarily imply a deficiency: ‘not having
Stomach-Qi’ can apply both to Deficient- and to Full-type pulses.
Thus, for example, a Wiry pulse by definition lacks Stomach-Qi
because it is too hard; conversely, a Soggy pulse also lacks
Stomach-Qi because it is too soft.
 
Remember: a pulse may lack ‘Stomach-Qi’ by being too
soft (Empty) or too hard (Full).
Root
The normal pulse should have a ‘root’; this has two meanings.
First, it means that the pulse on the Kidney position should be
normal; secondly, the pulse at the deep level (corresponding to
Liver and Kidneys in Li Shi Zhen’s configuration described above)
should be normal. Thus, a pulse ‘without root’ is either very weak
on the Kidney positions or very empty at the deep level.
1075
In a few cases, however, obstruction of the Lower Burner or the
Uterus by Cold may cause the Kidney pulse to be very weak or
almost imperceptible. This is due to Cold obstructing the Lower
Burner and preventing the blood coming through to the Rear
position of the pulse; it would be wrong to interpret this pulse as
having ‘no root’ because, once Cold is removed, the Kidney pulse
returns to normal. Thus, if the Kidney pulse is very weak, one
should always bear in mind the possibility that this might be due
to obstruction of the Lower Burner by Cold and check the
symptoms and signs to exclude this.
To summarize, the normal pulse has ‘spirit’, which indicates
good Heart-Qi, Stomach-Qi, which indicates good Stomach-Qi, and
a root, which indicates good Kidney-Qi; these three aspects
correspond to the Three Treasures: Spirit, Qi and Essence (
Jing–Qi–
Shen
 
) (
Table 49.5
 
).
Table 49.5
Normal pulse attributes
Normal pulse attributes
Organ
Vital substance
Spirit
Heart
Spirit (
Shen
 
)
Stomach-Qi
Stomach
Qi
Root
Kidneys
Essence (
Jing
 
)
I would add that the normal pulse also has a fourth quality and
that is a ‘wave’. This is a clear, smooth, wave-like movement from
the Rear towards the Front position; such a pulse indicates good
Stomach- and Heart-Qi. The pulse ‘without wave’ lacks the smooth,
wave-like flow and may be pathological either because it has no
wave or because its wave movement is excessively long. Many
pulse qualities actually depict a pulse without wave (e.g. Short,
Choppy, Scattered, Weak, Soggy), whereas others depict a pulse
with an excessive wave (e.g. Wiry, Long, Overflowing, Big). The
pulse lacking a wave often reflects the presence of emotional
problems due to sadness and grief, while the pulse with an
excessive wave often reflects emotional problems due to anger.
Passages from both the ‘Pulse Classic’ and the ‘Classic of
Difficulties’ seem to describe the attribute of a normal pulse with
wave even though they do not mention this word. For example, the
‘Pulse Classic’ says:
1076
The position behind the Inch and in front of the Foot position is the
Gate position; this is the boundary between the emerging Yang [at
the Inch position] and submerging Yin [at the Foot position].
Emerging Yang occupies three divisions [positions] and submerging
Yin also occupies three divi-sions 
[positions]. Yang originates at the
Foot position and moves [or manifests] towards the Inch position;
Yin originates in the Inch position and moves [or manifests]
towards the Foot position.
 
30
This passage clearly implies the notion of a wave of Qi, in its Yin
and Yang qualities, moving in the pulse from the Inch to the Rear
and from the Rear to the Inch position (
Fig. 49.14
 
).
1077
FIG. 49.14
 
Wave-like flow of Qi in the pulse
The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ in 
Chapter 3
 
has a similar concept in
a passage that describes the pulse lacking a wave (
Fig. 49.14b
 
) or
having an excessive wave:
In front of the Gate position, Yang moves and the pulse should
extend in 9 fen and be near the surface; if it exceeds 9 fen, it is in
excess and if it is shorter than 9 fen, it is deficient … Behind the
Gate position, Yin moves and the pulse should extend to 1 cun and
be at the deep level. If it exceeds 1 cun, it is in excess, while if it is
less than 1 cun, it is deficient.
 
31
1078
This passage essentially describes Long and Short pulse
qualities and a pulse having an excessive wave or lacking one
respectively.
Box 49.7
 
summarizes the attributes of a normal pulse.
 
BOX 49.7
 
   
 
ATTRIBUTES OF A NORMAL
PULSE
• 
 
Spirit: soft, gentle but with strength, regular
• 
 
Stomach-Qi: gentle, calm, relatively soft, relatively
slow
• 
 
Root: normal on the Rear positions and at the deep
level
• 
 
Wave: pulse with clear, smooth wave from the Rear to
the Front position
GUIDELINES FOR INTERPRETING
THE PULSE
When taking the pulse, I recommend assessing the aspects in the
following order.
 
1. 
 
Feel the pulse as a whole with three fingers to get an
initial idea of its overall strength or weakness.
2. 
 
Feel whether the pulse has spirit, Stomach-Qi and
root.
3. 
 
Feel the three positions first with three fingers and
then individually by gently lifting two of the fingers and
feeling with the third.
4. 
 
Feel the three levels by constantly lifting and
pressing the fingers, searching for them.
5. 
 
Feel the overall quality of the pulse, if there is one.
6. 
 
Feel the pulse quality, strength and level of each
individual pulse position by rolling and pushing the
fingers as described above.
7. 
 
Count the pulse rate.
1079
It is a good idea to train oneself to assess the above aspects of
the pulse in a rational order; for example, when taking the pulse
one should never immediately concentrate on a particular quality
of a specific organ position without first assessing the pulse as a
whole. Each of the above aspects of pulse taking has its own
clinical significance.
Feeling The Pulse As A Whole With Three
Fingers
Feeling the pulse as a whole with three fingers gives us an initial
idea of the overall strength or weakness of the pulse; this gives us
an initial assessment of the patient’s constitution and the strength
of his or her body’s Qi. It also enables us to appraise whether the
pulse matches the person’s body build.
Feeling The Spirit, Stomach-Qi And Root
Feeling the spirit, Stomach-Qi and root of the pulse gives us an
idea of the state of the Mind, Stomach-Qi and Kidneys. Stomach-Qi
is particularly important as it gives us an immediate idea of
whether the pulse is normal or not: any pulse that is either too soft
or too hard and full immediately tells us that Stomach-Qi is
lacking.
Feeling The Three Positions Together First
And Then Individually
Feeling the three positions together first is important to give us an
idea of the overall strength or weakness of the pulse and also to
compare the relative strengths of the left and right pulses. After
feeling the three positions together with the three fingers, we
should feel each position individually, gently lifting two of the
fingers and feeling with the third. At this stage, this is done not so
much to feel the state of the Internal Organs related to each
position but more to get an idea of the distribution and balance of
Qi among the three positions and therefore the Three Burners.
It is important to remember that the feeling of strength or
1080
weakness in the three pulse positions reflects the state and
distribution of Qi in the Three Burners, irrespective of the
individual organs; in other words, we can get a good idea of the
strength or weakness of Qi and its ‘rebelliousness’ (flowing in the
wrong direction) by carefully feeling and assessing the flow of Qi
in the three pulse positions initially ignoring the organs associated
with those positions. To put it differently, we must remember that
the three pulse positions reflect parts of the body as well as
organs. The ‘Simple Questions’ confirms this in 
Chapter 17
 
when it
says: ‘
 
When the upper [position] of the pulse is strong [it means
that] Qi is rushing upwards; when the lower [position] of the pulse
is strong [it means that] Qi is distended [below].’
 
32
At this stage, we can get an initial idea of the relative strength of
Qi and Blood in the Three Burners. For example, if the pulse is very
weak on both Rear positions and relatively overflowing on both
Front positions, this may indicate that Qi is rebelling upwards and
that this upward rebellion is most probably due to a deficiency of
Qi and Blood in the Lower Burner so that Qi is not ‘anchored’ in
the Lower Burner and rebels upwards towards the Upper Burner.
Feeling The Three Levels
One feels the three levels by constantly lifting and pressing down
the fingers to ‘search’ for them. It is a good idea to search for the
middle level in two different ways: first by gently pressing down
from the superficial level, and then by pressing all the way down to
the deep level and slowly lifting the fingers to stop at the middle
level.
Feeling the three levels is essential to give us an idea of the state
of Qi/Yang, Blood and Yin and also of the level of Qi in the body.
For example, if the pulse is Floating-Empty, this means two things:
first, that Qi is weak at the deep level and in relative excess at the
superficial level; secondly, that there is a Yin deficiency with a
relative Yang excess. These are not two different phenomena but
simply two different ways of interpreting the same clinical
situation and expressing its pathology.
Integrating the three positions (corresponding to the Three
Burners) with the three levels, we form a three-dimensional
1081
picture of the Qi in the body in a similar way that Western
medicine does with CT (computerized tomography), MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) and PET (positron emission
tomography) scans (
Fig. 49.15
 
). This picture is clinically relevant
even without referring to the correspondence of positions to
organs at all. The relative strength of Qi in each Burner and at each
level is clinically significant even without referring to the organs at
all and it is actually a good exercise when reading the pulse not to
get too ‘fixated’ on the assignment of each position to a particular
organ. In other words, an assessment of Qi in the three positions
and three levels gives us a dynamic picture of the distribution and
balance of Qi in the body which is necessary 
before
 
we analyse each
position in its relation to a particular organ.
1082
FIG. 49.15
 
Relationship between the three positions and Three
Burners and between the three levels and the three energetic
layers
Figure 49.16
 
shows how the pulse reflects the energy in the
Three Burners, at the three levels and on the left and right sides.
1083
FIG. 49.16
 
Relationship between the three positions and Three
Burners, between the three levels and the three energetic layers
and between the left and right pulse and the left and right side
Feeling The Overall Quality Of The Pulse, If
There Is One
The next step is to try to feel if the pulse has an overall quality,
remembering that a pulse’s ‘quality’ can be felt only by ‘rolling’
and ‘pushing’ the fingers as described above. The pulse does not
always have an overall quality; for example, it may be slightly
Overflowing in the Heart position but very Weak in the
Spleen/Stomach position. In contrast, a pulse may feel very clearly
and very definitely Wiry in all positions, giving a strong indication
of a Liver disharmony (or Phlegm).
If a pulse has a clear, overall quality, this generally means that
the disharmony of the patient is fairly simple; for example, if all
the pulse positions are Wiry, this indicates a Liver disharmony (or
Phlegm) and no other disharmonies. In contrast, if a pulse has
1084
several different qualities in different positions, this indicates that
the patient suffers from a complex disharmony characterized by
both Deficiency and Excess conditions in various organs.
Feeling The Pulse Quality, Strength And
Level Of Each Individual Position By Rolling
And Pushing The Fingers
The next step consists in feeling the pulse quality, strength and
level of each individual position by gently lifting two fingers while
the third concentrates on a particular position. It is important to
note that to assess each individual position the finger is constantly
moving, searching, exploring the shape and level of pulse; this is
done by ‘rolling’ the finger distally and medially, ‘pushing’ the
finger medially and laterally, and ‘lifting and pressing’ the finger to
feel the level of the pulse. Rolling tells us whether the pulse in that
position is Short, Long, Choppy, Moving or without 
wave; pushing
tells us whether the pulse in that position is Choppy, Slippery,
Wiry, Weak, Scattered, Big, Overflowing, Fine, Minute, etc.; lifting
and pressing tells us whether the pulse in that position is Floating,
Deep, Weak, Soggy, Floating-Empty, Hidden, Leathery, or Firm.
Counting The Pulse Rate
Finally, counting of the pulse rate is carried out. As mentioned
above, in past times this was done by referring the pulse rate to
the breathing rate of the practitioners. Nowadays, we simply count
the pulse rate with a watch. This is of course crucial to diagnosing
pulse qualities that reflect irregularities of the pulse rate and
rhythm (e.g. Slow, Rapid, Slowed-Down, Hurried, Moving, Knotted,
Hasty, Intermittent).
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF PULSE
DIAGNOSIS
Pulse diagnosis is an essential part of Chinese diagnosis for many
reasons. Two aspects could be singled out as being the most
1085
important features of pulse diagnosis: first, apart from giving us
indications about prevailing disharmonies, it also reflects the
constitution of a person; secondly, when expertly applied, pulse
diagnosis can give us a very detailed and accurate picture of the
state of Qi in all organs and all parts of the body.
The following are some examples of the clinical application of
pulse diagnosis.
The Pulse Is Often Crucial In Clinching A
Diagnosis
The pulse is often crucial in clinching a diagnosis. A common
example of the value of the pulse in clinching the diagnosis is
when a person (usually a man) presents complaining of tiredness,
sluggishness and general listlessness. He may speak with a low
voice and the general first impression would be that a Deficiency
is the cause of the problem. However, if the pulse is Wiry on both
sides (as often happens in such patients), this clearly points to
Liver-Qi stagnation as the cause of the problem; in such a case, the
pulse is often the only symptom pointing to a Full condition, and
specifically Liver-Qi stagnation, as the cause of the problem.
Case history 49.1
 
is an illustration of the value of the pulse in
clinching a diagnosis.
 
Case History 49.1
A 65-year-old woman complained of an acute pain in
the ribs on the left-hand side. She had seen her doctor
and an orthopaedic surgeon who had ordered X-rays,
which showed no abnormality. Both the doctor and the
surgeon treated this as a musculoskeletal problem.
When asking her about her symptom I was also
somewhat puzzled as she had no symptoms of a Liver
or Gall-Bladder pattern that might explain the rib pain.
I was also puzzled as to why, if this was indeed a
musculoskeletal problem, it should start suddenly
without a fall or any other apparent cause. However, her
pulse told a completely different story: it was very
Rapid (over 100), Overflowing and Slippery. In
particular, the right Front position (Lung position) was
1086
very Overflowing. This pulse clearly indicated that, far
from being a simple musculoskeletal problem, she had
a serious internal organ problem and, although one
cannot conclusively diagnose cancer, I suspected there
was a serious disease in the left lung causing the rib
pain. I thought this would be either pleurisy or a
carcinoma.
I insisted that she went back to the doctor for further
tests. An MRI scan and blood tests showed that she had
carcinoma of the left lung and spine.
The Pulse Is Essential To Distinguish
Deficiency From Excess
Distinguishing Deficiency from Excess is one of the most useful
aspects of pulse diagnosis. In many cases, the patient presents
with a mixture of Deficiency and Excess; indeed, this, rather than a
pure Deficiency or pure Excess condition, is probably the most
common situation in practice.
Postviral fatigue syndrome is a good example of this situation:
practically all patients suffering from this condition suffer from
retention of Dampness together with a deficiency of the Spleen,
Stomach, Lungs or Kidneys, or a mixture of these. However, the
combination of a Deficient and an Excess condition is never 50–50:
one aspect is always predominant and it is often not easy to
determine this from the symptoms and signs. For example, a
patient suffering from postviral fatigue syndrome will experience
extreme fatigue and poor appetite (symptoms of Deficiency) but
also muscle aches and a feeling of heaviness (symptoms of
Fullness, in this case Dampness). In such a situ-ation, the pulse is
absolutely crucial in clinching whether the Deficiency or the
Excess predominates: if the pulse is on the whole weak, this means
that the Deficiency predominates; if the pulse is on the whole of
the full type, this means that the Excess predominates. Thus, in
this case, the pulse is the single most important aspect of
diagnosis to make this differentiation.
1087
The important implication of this is that the pulse therefore
determines the choice of treatment principle: if it is weak on the
whole, we should concentrate on tonifying the Upright Qi; if it is of
the full type on the whole, we should concentrate on expelling
pathogenic factors (in this case, resolve Dampness).
The Pulse Is Essential To Determine The
Treatment Principle
The pulse is essential to determine the treatment principle in
complex conditions of mixed Deficiency and Excess. The example
of postviral fatigue syndrome was given above. Another example
could be a situation of Liver-Blood deficiency leading to Liver-Yang
rising; this situation is very common in women and it is often the
cause of menstrual problems such as premenstrual tension or
menstrual headaches. The symptoms themselves may not help us
to determine whether the deficiency of Liver-Blood or the rising of
Liver-Yang predominates. The pulse can help us to differentiate
this very clearly: if it is Choppy or Fine, the deficiency of Liver-
Blood predominates and we should therefore nourish Blood; if it is
Wiry, the rising of Liver-Yang predominates and we should
therefore subdue Liver-Yang.
The Pulse In Emotional Problems
In many situations, the pulse reflects emotional problems clearly.
A few examples will be given here.
When a person is affected by sadness, grief or worry, the Heart
pulse may become slightly and relatively Overflowing; it is
important to note that this is not the true Overflowing pulse, but it
is nevertheless slightly Overflowing 
in relation to
 
the other
positions. Often the pulse may be quite Weak or Choppy on the
whole, but a careful feeling of the Heart position reveals that it is
very slightly Overflowing compared with the rest of the pulse. This
Heart-pulse quality is quite subtle and may be easily missed;
besides being more superficial compared with the other pulse
positions, the Heart pulse also feels somewhat ‘round’ and very
slightly Slippery. This is a sure sign that the patient is deeply
1088
affected by emotional problems such as sorrow, sadness or grief
affecting the Heart. When all the other pulses are weak but the
Heart pulse is relatively Overflowing as described, this usually
indicates that the person is suffering from sadness and bears the
emotional strain in silence.
Another good example of a clear reflection of emotional stress
by the pulse is the situation when a patient may appear very
depressed, walk slowly and talk with a low voice – all of which lead
us to assume that he or she suffers from a Deficiency; however,
very often (and more commonly in men), the pulse of these people
is extremely Wiry and Full in all positions. This is an absolutely
reliable indication that that person is not really depressed but
angry, or, to put it differently, may be depressed because of
repressed anger.
A Rapid pulse is another indication of emotional stress. Usually
the person is under great stress and suffers from fear, anxiety, guilt
or the consequence of shock. 
Case history 49.2
 
is an illustration of
this point.
 
Case History 49.2
A 28-year-old woman complained of tiredness, nausea
and dizziness. She had no other symptoms and she
seemed quite healthy. Emotionally she appeared to be
quite happy and she spoke with a cheerful, ringing
voice, smiling frequently. All the indications were,
therefore, that she suffered from a simple deficiency of
the Spleen and possibly Blood as many women do.
However, the pulse showed a completely different
picture: it was Fine and very Rapid (over 100). Her
tongue had a red tip. I had the feeling that she had
long-standing, repressed emotional problems and I
suspected shock was the main cause of them. When I
asked her whether she had suffered a shock some years
before she burst into tears and said that she had been
sexually abused from the age of 6 to 9.
Of course, we should exclude other causes of a Rapid
pulse such as an infection, a true Heat pattern or Blood
Heat. In the absence of clear Heat symptoms and signs,
a Rapid pulse usually indicates the above-mentioned
1089
emotional problems.
A pulse without wave indicates that the person
suffers from sadness or grief, which may also be
indicated by a very Weak Lung pulse. A Full Lung pulse
may indicate that the person suffers either from worry
or from unexpressed grief. If both Front positions
(Lungs and Heart) are Weak and Short, they indicate
long-standing emotional problems deriving from
sadness or grief. A Moving pulse often indicates shock;
it should be noted that the pulse may retain this quality
many years after the original shock.
Box 49.8
 
summarizes the pulse qualities in emotional problems.
 
BOX 49.8
 
   
 
THE PULSE IN EMOTIONAL
PROBLEMS
• 
 
Heart pulse slightly Overflowing: sadness, grief or
worry
• 
 
All pulses Wiry and Full: repressed anger or
frustration
• 
 
Rapid pulse: fear, guilt or shock
• 
 
Pulse without a wave: sadness or grief
• 
 
Weak Lung pulse: sadness or grief
• 
 
Full Lung pulse: worry or unexpressed grief
• 
 
Both Front positions Weak and Short: long-standing
sadness or grief
• 
 
Moving pulse: shock
The Pulse As An Indicator Of An Organ
Problem
When all the pulse positions are very weak and deep except for
one, this usually indicates that the organ corresponding to that
position is ‘diseased’. This often points to an actual organic
1090
disease in a Western medical sense (rather than a Chinese pattern
of disharmony), but it is by no means an absolute rule. For
example, if the pulse is Weak, Choppy and Deep in all positions
except in the Heart position, this may simply indicate deep
emotional problems as described above, but it may also indicate
an actual heart problem; the latter is all the more likely if the Heart
pulse feels Slippery and Fine, and particularly if Slippery in its
medial and lateral sides.
A Floating quality on the Heart pulse also often indicates a
problem with the heart itself, especially if it is Floating-Hollow on
the lateral and medial sides of the pulse position (which may
indicate high blood pressure). A Floating-Weak-Hollow quality
indicates that the heart is dilated; this occurs often in people who
jog for long distances every day. A Floating-Tight-Hollow quality
may indicate hardening of the arteries.
The Pulse As An Indicator Of A Heart
Problem
Just as Heart-Qi is reflected on the pulse as a whole, irrespective of
positions, the condition of the heart (in the Western sense) is also
reflected on the whole pulse, not only at the left Front position. We
should always remember that when we feel the pulse we feel the
radial artery, which is a blood vessel, and that the Heart governs all
blood vessels; thus, by definition, the general feeling of the radial
artery reflects the condition of the Heart in a Chinese sense and
also of the heart in a Western medical sense.
For example, when the whole pulse is Wiry, Slippery,
Overflowing and Hurried and feels very hard, aortic aneurysm may
be suspected.
If the pulse is Hurried (i.e. very rapid and agitated) and
generally Full, this often indicates a heart problem such as
tachycardia (in all its various types, e.g. supraventricular
tachycardia, junctional tachycardia or broad-complex tachycardia).
Similarly, any irregu-larity 
of the pulse (Knotted, Hasty,
Intermittent) may indicate a heart conduction problem such as
atrial fibrillation (when it is rapid and irregular, i.e. Hasty), sick
sinus syndrome, Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome or
1091
Lown–Ganong–Levine (LGL) syndrome.
If the pulse is extremely Slow, this may also indicate a heart
problem such as sick sinus syndrome or atrioventricular block
(unless, of course, it is due to intense, regular exercise such as in
athletes).
If the pulse is Minute or Scattered, this may indicate the
possibility of heart failure. The medial and lateral aspects of the
Heart pulse may reflect problems of the valves such as mitral
stenosis, mitral regurgitation or mitral prolapse; in such cases,
these aspects of the Heart pulse (felt by rolling the finger medially
and laterally very slightly) feel Slippery or Tight. (See 
Fig. 50.2 on
p. 500
 
.)
Case histories 49.3
 
–
49.5
 
illustrate the use of the pulse in
diagnosing heart conditions.
 
Case History 49.3
A 45-year-old woman complained of extreme tiredness,
something she had been suffering from for over 20
years. She also complained of poor memory, floaters,
tinnitus, frequent urination and occasional dribbling of
urine. She also suffered from constipation and her
periods had stopped 6 months previously.
As a child, she had suffered from frequent bouts of
bronchitis and pneumonia. She had received
acupuncture treatment for 5 years and Chinese herbs
for about 2; these treatments did produce some
improvement but it never lasted.
Her tongue was slightly Red on the sides and Swollen
and her pulse was Deep, very Weak, Choppy, Fine and
Slow (52).
Three main patterns emerge from an analysis of the
clinical manifestations: Liver-Blood deficiency
(stoppage of the periods, floaters, tiredness, Choppy
pulse), Kidney-Yang deficiency (tinnitus, frequent
urination, dribbling of urine, tiredness, constipation,
Deep-Weak-Slow pulse), and Heart-Blood deficiency
(poor memory, Choppy pulse). However, the fact that
the pulse is very Weak, Choppy and Fine in 
all
positions and also that it is very Slow clearly indicates
1092
that the main problem probably lies in the Heart, and
specifically a severe deficiency of Qi and Blood of the
Heart. This deficiency may be congenital or may have
been induced by the frequent bouts of bronchitis and
pneumonia during her childhood. I advised this patient
to have her heart examined by a cardiologist; she did
this and the cardiologist did say that the pericardium
membrane was enlarged and showed signs of
inflammation.
The principle of treatment in this case, therefore,
should be not only to nourish Liver-Blood and tonify
Kidney-Yang, but also to tonify the Qi and Blood of the
Heart.
 
Case History 49.4
A 60-year-old man sought treatment for a frozen
shoulder. On taking his pulse, I noticed that it was very
Full, Slippery, Wiry, very Overflowing and Rapid. The
combination of these qualities to such a degree clearly
indicated not only a Heart disharmony but also the
possibility of a problem in the heart or blood vessels;
however, he had no symptoms of heart problems (no
hypertension, no chest pain, no arrhythmia). Although
he came to me for treatment of his shoulder problem, I
tried to encourage him to see a cardiologist, which he
did and he was found to have an aneurysm of the aorta
for which he needed an operation.
 
Case History 49.5
A 25-year-old woman complained of painful periods
with clear symptoms of Cold in the Uterus (spastic
pain, feeling cold during the period, menstrual blood
with small dark clots, Pale tongue, Slow pulse).
1093
However, a striking feature of her pulse (for her age)
was its Slowness (48) and its stopping at irregular
intervals: such pulse quality (Slow and stopping at
irregular intervals) is called Knotted. This indicated the
possibility, not only of a Heart disharmony, but of an
actual heart problem and she was advised to see a
cardiologist who indeed diagnosed a conduction
problem in the heart.
The Pulse Does Not Necessarily Reflect All
The Aspects Of A Disharmony
As for the tongue, we should not expect the pulse to reflect 
all
 
the
aspects of a disharmony. For example, if a woman suffers from
Liver-Qi stagnation causing very clear symptoms of premenstrual
tension with distension of the breasts and abdomen and
irritability, the pulse may not be Wiry if the Liver-Qi stagnation
occurs against a background of Liver-Blood deficiency; in such a
case, the pulse may be Weak and Choppy reflecting the Liver-
Blood deficiency but not the Liver-Qi stagnation. The opposite may
also occur: in the above example, the pulse may be Wiry if the
Liver-Qi stagnation is intense, in which case the pulse quality
reflects only this pattern and not the Liver-Blood deficiency.
In the elderly, the pulse is frequently of the full type, often being
Wiry or Slippery, or both; this happens because old people suffer
frequently from chronic Phlegm, Blood stasis or internal Wind, all
of which may make the pulse Wiry and hard. However, very many
old people suffering from such patterns also frequently suffer
from Yin deficiency (which may be apparent from a lack of tongue
coating); the Wiry and Full quality of the pulse masks the Yin
deficiency, which does not show on the pulse.
The Pulse Indicates Disharmonies Beyond
The Presenting Patterns
When the pulse indicates disharmonies beyond the presenting
1094
patterns it raises the important issue of integration of pulse
diagnosis with symptom diagnosis. In the majority of cases, the
pulse and clinical manifestations accord with each other; for
example, if a patient displays all the symptoms of Phlegm, the
pulse is most likely Slippery. In other cases, as mentioned above,
the pulse reflects only one aspect of a disharmony. There are cases,
however, when the pulse seems to be at variance with the clinical
manifestations, or at least unrelated to them. The tendency in
modern China (according to my experience) is to give more
importance to the clinical manifestations; if the pulse does not
accord with them it is simply ignored. I personally disagree with
this approach as I think that the pulse is always clinically
significant and should never be discarded as a diagnostic sign.
Many examples could be given of situations when the pulse
seems to be unrelated to the clinical manifestations (not
necessarily contradicting them); for example, the patient has
symptoms of Phlegm but the pulse is not Slippery, the patient has
no
 
symptoms of Phlegm but the pulse is Slippery, the patient
appears to be an exuberant, Yang type of person but the pulse is
very Weak and Deep; the patient has no symptoms of any Liver
disharmony but the pulse is Wiry (or vice versa), etc.
In such cases, apart from the above-mentioned situation when
the pulse reflects one aspect of a disharmony and the clinical
manifestations another, a pulse that is seemingly unrelated to the
presenting clinical manifestations simply reflects the existence of a
disharmony that has not 
yet
 
caused symptoms.
A common example relates to the Lung pulse: a woman may
present with clinical manifestations of Liver-Qi stagnation causing
premenstrual tension or other menstrual irregularities and the
pulse is slightly Wiry but the position that most stands out is that
of the Lung being extremely Weak and Deep. What are we to make
of this? Since all the clinical manifestations and the Wiry pulse
point to a Liver disharmony shall we ignore the Lung position? In
my opinion, this should never be done. In this example, the
weakness of the Lung position simply indicates that this patient
suffers from Lung-Qi deficiency without symptoms of it 
yet
 
; the
weakness of the Lung position should never be ignored also
because, after all, a Weak Lung pulse is reflective of Lung-Qi
1095
deficiency as much as a weak voice and chronic cough. In such a
case, I would definitely pay attention to the weakness of the Lung
pulse and tonify the Lungs (in addition to treating the Liver
disharmony).
To give another example relating to a full rather than empty-type
of pulse, it happens frequently that a person has no symptoms of
Phlegm but the pulse is clearly Slippery; barring the cases when a
Slippery pulse may indicate health (or of course pregnancy), this
definitely indicates that the patient is suffering from Phlegm even
though there are no manifestations of it.
Incidentally, this characteristic applies to tongue diagnosis too:
the tongue also can show disharmonies beyond the presenting
manifestations. A good example is a central Stomach crack on the
tongue indicating a tendency to Stomach-Yin deficiency even in
the absence of any digestive symptoms.
The Pulse Can Indicate An Underlying
Deficiency In The Absence Of Symptoms
When the pulse is Weak in a certain position, it definitely indicates
Deficiency of that particular organ whether there are symptoms of
Deficiency or not. It is 
precisely for this reason that pulse
diagnosis allows us to give preventive treatment before the onset
of clinical manifestations.
A weakness of the Kidney pulse (often on both sides) is the most
common example of this situation. There are very many patients
(especially women) who have a very Weak pulse on both Rear
positions without any symptoms of Kidney deficiency; however, as
mentioned above, a Weak and Deep pulse on both Rear positions
reflects a Kidney deficiency as much as tiredness, backache,
dizziness and tinnitus do. Indeed, this is precisely one reason why
pulse diagnosis is so important: it points to a certain disharmony
unequivocally, which is more than isolated symptoms do. In the
example just mentioned above, if the patient suffered only from
dizziness we could not diagnose a Kidney deficiency because this
symptom may be due to many other disharmonies (Blood
deficiency, Phlegm, Liver-Yang rising, etc.), but the weakness of the
pulse on both Rear positions points unequivocally to a Kidney
1096
deficiency.
The Pulse In Cancer
There is no specific pulse quality or pulse picture that allows us to
diagnose cancer unequivocally. Generally speaking, in advanced
cancer two opposite pulse pictures may emerge: either the pulse
becomes extremely Weak, Choppy, Fine and Deep or it becomes
Full, Slippery, Overflowing and Rapid.
Although the pulse cannot be used to diagnose cancer, it is very
important to determine the prognosis and the treatment principle.
As for 
prognosis
 
, if a patient has cancer the prognosis is poor if
the pulse has either of the pictures described above (i.e. it is either
very Deep, Weak, Choppy and Fine, or very Full, Slippery,
Overflowing and Rapid). If the pulse in addition is particularly
Rapid and Overflowing this may indicate the presence of Toxic
Heat, which is never a good sign in cancer or in cancer patients
who have undergone Western treatment.
As for the 
treatment principle
 
, the pulse is very important
indeed. Generally speaking, cancer patients will undergo some
treatment in the form of surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy, or
a combination of these. At the end of these treatments, our role is
to stimulate the immune system to prevent a recurrence. From the
point of view of Chinese medicine, we have to assess the condition
of the patient as if the cancer were still present. In fact, Western
treatments may remove the cancer surgically, by radiotherapy or
chemotherapy, but they do not remove the patterns that were at
the root of the cancer; the most common patterns seen are Phlegm,
Blood stasis, Toxic Heat and Dampness.
We should therefore assess the patient’s condition very carefully
to determine whether Deficiency or Excess predominates, that is,
whether the above pathogenic factors are relatively weak and the
main problem is a deficiency of the Upright Qi or whether the
above pathogenic factors are still quite strong. In the former case,
the aim is to tonify the Upright Qi primarily and expel pathogenic
factors secondarily; in the latter case the aim is to expel pathogenic
factors primarily and tonify the Upright Qi secondarily. The pulse
is crucial in making this distinction and choosing the appropriate
1097
treatment principle: if the pulse is primarily Weak, Fine, Choppy
or Empty, we need to concentrate our attention on tonifying the
Upright Qi; if the pulse is of the full type, Slippery, Wiry, Tight or
Firm, we need to concentrate on expelling pathogenic factors
(which may be to resolve Phlegm, invigorate Blood, resolve
Dampness or clear Toxic Heat).
 
In cancer patients after surgery, the pulse is crucial in
determining whether there is still an active pathogenic
factor and therefore in determining the treatment
principle.
For example, let us assume that a woman suffering from a
malignant breast tumour comes to us after undergoing a
lumpectomy and ensuing radiotherapy. We should assess her
condition carefully as if she still had the tumour because the
surgery and radiotherapy have removed the tumour but not the
pattern at the root of its formation. The patterns appearing in
breast cancer are usually Phlegm or Blood stasis, or both, in
differing combinations; of course, there is often also Qi stagnation
but this cannot cause a tumour by itself, whereas Phlegm and
Blood stasis can.
When presented with such patients we should therefore not
assume in all cases that we must tonify the Upright Qi to prevent a
recurrence: we must choose the treatment principle according to
the clinical manifestations bearing in mind that we cannot rely on
an examination of the tumour as this has been removed. In the
presence of a tumour we would palpate it to decide whether it is
caused by Phlegm (in which case it is relatively soft and painless)
or by Blood stasis (in which case it is hard and probably painful). A
decision on the choice of treatment principles relies a lot on the
pulse: if this is of the empty type, we should concentrate our
attention on 
tonifying the Upright Qi; if it is of the full type
(Slippery, Wiry, Tight) we should concentrate on expelling
pathogenic factors (resolve Phlegm or invigorate Blood, or both). If
the pulse in addition is also Rapid and Overflowing this may
indicate the presence of Toxic Heat and we need to clear Heat and
1098
resolve Toxin (in herbal medicine this is done by using herbs from
the category which clear Toxic Heat, many of which have also an
anticancer effect).
INTEGRATION OF PULSE AND
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
There are many ways in which the integration of pulse and tongue
diagnosis is crucial in clinical practice.
Qi And Blood
The pulse and tongue are quite complementary in so far as the
pulse reflects more the state of Qi while the tongue that of Blood;
of course this is a generalization (because the pulse can reflect the
state of Blood, e.g. when it is Choppy), but it is a useful one
nevertheless.
This distinction can be useful in patients suffering from
emotional problems. For example, a Wiry and Full pulse often
indicates a Liver pattern deriving from emotional stress and if the
tongue-body colour is normal this tells us that the emotional
problem is not long standing; if the tongue is Red this indicates
that the emotional problem is more long standing and more
severe.
Time Factor
The pulse is more influenced by short-term factors than is the
tongue. For example, a period of overwork, an emotional upset and
physical exercise can all change the pulse in the short term but not
the tongue.
For this reason, the tongue is a good indicator of the length of a
problem; for example, an Overflowing Heart pulse indicates that
the person is under emotional stress and if the tongue is Red with
a redder tip this indicates that this problem is long standing.
Another example is that of Blood stasis. A Choppy or Firm pulse
may point to Blood stasis and if the tongue is Purple this indicates
that the problem is of long duration. Another good example is that
1099
of Yin deficiency. A Floating-Empty pulse indicates Yin deficiency
and we can tell exactly the stage of Yin deficiency by observing the
degree of absence of coating on the tongue.
When The Pulse Is Rapid And The Tongue Is
Not Red
A Rapid pulse indicates Heat and this should be mirrored by a Red
tongue. In practice, quite often the pulse is Rapid but the tongue is
not Red.
Shock may be an explanation of this discrepancy because it often
makes the pulse Rapid but it does not cause redness of the tongue.
Another explanation of this discrepancy is in cases when a
person constantly pushes himself or herself into working too
much and too long hours; this causes the heart to become dilated
and then the Heart pulse is often Overflowing but Empty and the
pulse Rapid.
When The Pulse Is Slow And The Tongue Is
Red
The most common explanation of this discrepancy is the practice
of intense exercise, especially jogging or running; this makes the
pulse Slow. Because the Slowness is due to the exercise and not to
a true Cold pattern, the tongue is not Pale and may be Red from
other reasons.
Another possible explanation of a contradiction between a Slow
pulse and a Red tongue (and one that should always be kept in
mind) is heart disease. A very Slow pulse may often indicate some
irregularities in heart conduction, especially if the pulse is also
irregular.
Pulse Diagnosis Adds Detail To Tongue
Diagnosis
The pulse often adds detail to the findings from tongue diagnosis.
For example, a sticky yellow coating with red points on the root of
the tongue indicates Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner but it does
1100
not tell us whether this is in the Bladder, Intestines or Uterus. The
pulse would add detail to the information gleaned from the tongue
because Damp-Heat in the Bladder would manifest with a
Slippery-Wiry quality on the left Rear position, Damp-Heat in the
Intestines with the same quality on both Rear positions, while
Damp-Heat in the Uterus would manifest with the same quality on
the Uterus position just proximal to the left Rear position.
Another field in which the pulse adds detail to the tongue is that
of Heart patterns. When the tongue has a deep central crack, this
indicates the tendency to Heart patterns from emotional problems.
However, it may also indicate the hereditary tendency to actual
heart problems. If the Heart pulse is Full and hard on the lateral
and medial positions of the Heart position (rolling the finger
laterally and medially very slightly), this indicates the possibility
of an actual heart disease.
Another situation in which the pulse adds detail to the findings
from the tongue is when the tongue is Purple, indicating Blood
stasis. If the whole tongue is Purple, this does not help us to
pinpoint the organ affected; the Wiry quality of the pulse in one or
other organ position helps us to pinpoint which organ is
particularly affected by Blood stasis.
LIMITATIONS OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
The main drawbacks of pulse diagnosis are its subjectivity and its
being readily affected by short-term changes.
It Is Subjective
More than any other element of Chinese diagnosis, pulse
diagnosis is rather subjective, at least compared with other
elements of diagnosis such as looking. For example, there can be
little disagreement over whether a face is red or a tongue very Red;
such signs can also be seen objectively by different observers. If,
however, a pulse is described as being Wiry, this is a purely
subjective interpretation on the part of the practitioner; it is
impossible to ‘show’ other observers how the pulse is Wiry and,
moreover, another practitioner might describe the same pulse as
1101
Slippery.
It Is Subject To Short-Term Influences
The pulse is easily and quickly influenced by short-term factors, at
least when compared with the tongue. For example, if a person has
a sudden emotional upset, this may make the pulse rapid but it
will not change the tongue in the short term. Likewise, the pulse is
obviously affected by exercise, becoming rapid, whereas the
tongue is not affected by it. If a person works very hard for a week
with little sleep the pulse will reflect this, immediately becoming
quite weak and deep, but a single week would not bring about a
change in the tongue-body colour (though there are some
situations, such as in acute febrile diseases, when the tongue-body
colour does change rapidly).
For these reasons, the integration of tongue and pulse diagnosis,
as discussed above, is absolutely crucial.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:130 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House:
Beijing, 1979:1–2 First published c. 
AD
 
100.
3. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1979; 2.
4. 
Simple Questions, p. 78.
5. 
Simple Questions, p. 139.
6. 
Classic of Difficulties, pp. 4–5.
7. 
Fuzhou City People’s Hospital. ‘A Revised Explanation of
the Pulse Classic (
Mai Jing Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1988:7 The ‘Pulse Classic’ was
1102
written by Wang Shu He and was first published in 
AD
 
280
8. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, p. 6
9. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, p. 46
10. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, pp. 45–
46
11. 
A Revised Explanation of the Pulse Classic, pp. 18–19
12. 
Shu, Cheng Bao. An Annotated Translation of the Study of
the Pulse from Pin Hu Lake (
Pin Hu Mai Xue Yi Zhu
 
). Beijing: Ancient Chinese Medical Texts Publishing
House, 1988; 3–4. [‘The Study of the Pulse from Pin Hu
Lake’ was first published in 1564. ].
13. 
Qian, Wu. Golden Mirror of Medicine (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
); Vol. 2. People’s Health Publishing House, Beijing,
1977:909. [First published in 1742].
14. 
Nong, Cheng Xin. Chinese Acupuncture and Moxibustion,
(
Zhong Guo Zhen Jiu
 
 
). Beijing: Foreign Languages
Press, 1987.
15. 
Bejing/Nanjing/Shanghai College of Chinese Medicine,
‘Fundamentals of Chinese Medicine’ translated by N.
Wiseman and A. Ellis, Paradigm Publications, Brookline,
Massachusetts, USA, 1985
16. 
A Revised Explanation of the Pulse Classic, p. 15
17. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, p. 12
18. 
Simple Questions, p. 98.
19. 
Yue, Zhang Jing. Classic of Categories (
Lei Jing
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing Company, 1982; 561. [The
Classic of Categories was first published in 1624].
20. 
Yue, Zhang Jing. Classic of Categories (
Lei Jing
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing Company, 1982; 131.
21. 
Simple Questions, pp. 118–119.
22. 
Simple Questions, pp. 101.
23. 
A Revised Explanation of the Pulse Classic, p. 16
24. 
An Annotated Translation of the Study of the Pulse from
Pin Hu Lake, p. 4
25. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, p. 50
26. 
An Annotated Translation of the Study of the Pulse from
Pin Hu Lake, p. 4
27. 
Yuan, Chen Jia. ‘Eight Secret Books on Gynaecology’ (
Fu Ke
1103
Mi Shu Ba Zhong
 
 
). Ancient Chinese Medicine Texts
Publishing House: Beijing, 1988:153 Chen’s book, written
during the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), was entitled ‘Secret
Gynaecological Prescriptions’ (
Fu Ke Mi Fang
 
 
)
28. 
Pulse Classic, p. 14
29. 
Guang Dong College of Chinese Medicine. ‘Diagnosis in
Chinese Medicine’ (
Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1979; 178.
30. 
A Revised Explanation of the Pulse Classic, p. 7
31. 
A Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties, p. 6
32. 
Simple Questions, p. 98.
1104
CHAPTER 50
 
PULSE
QUALITIES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
FEELING AND IDENTIFYING THE PULSE QUALITY
THE EIGHT BASIC PULSE QUALITIES
Floating
Deep
Slow
Rapid
Empty
Full
Slippery
Choppy
EMPTY-TYPE PULSES
Weak
Fine
Minute
1105
Soggy (Weak-Floating)
Short
Hollow
Leather
Hidden
Scattered
FULL-TYPE PULSES
Wiry
Tight
Overflowing
Big
Firm
Long
Moving
PULSES WITH IRREGULARITIES OF RATE OR RHYTHM
Knotted
Hasty
Hurried
Intermittent
Slowed-Down
THREE NON-TRADITIONAL PULSE QUALITIES
Irregular
Stagnant
Sad
CLASSIFICATION OF PULSE QUALITIES
The eight basic groups of pulse qualities
1106
The different aspects for the Classification of
pulse qualities
Classification of pulse qualities according to Qi,
Blood and Body Fluids patterns
Classification of pulse qualities according to the
Eight Principles
Classification of pulse qualities according to the
Six Stages patterns
Classification of pulse qualities according to the
Four Levels patterns
Classification of pulse qualities according to the
Triple Burner patterns
TERMINOLOGY
THE PULSE POSITIONS IN DETAIL
Left Front position (Heart)
Left Middle position (Liver)
Left Rear position (Kidney)
Right Front position (Lungs)
Right Middle position (Stomach and Spleen)
Right Rear position (Small Intestine and
Kidneys)
PULSE QUALITIES INDICATING DANGEROUS CONDITIONS
THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS ON THE PULSE
INTRODUCTION
The pulse ‘qualities’ described in Chinese books over the centuries
have varied but they have been standardized today into 28 or 29
1107
qualities. In theory, there is no 
special reason why we should be
restricted to using only those terms; for example, there is no ‘Hard’
pulse quality, but this is a term that often comes to mind when
feeling a particular pulse. However, it is important to train oneself
to use the set terminology of pulse qualities in order to establish a
common ground of communication among practitioners and
between teachers and students; for example, a practitioner or
student might describe a pulse as ‘squidgy’ in his or her own
terminology (in fact, the term ‘squidgy’ describes the Soggy pulse
quite well) but this would not be much use to other practitioners
or students.
It cannot be stressed strongly enough that the pulse qualities,
with their description and clinical significance, should be
memorized. Only by memorizing the pulse qualities can students
then communicate with the clinical teacher; only when both the
students and the clinical teacher are clear as to what a Wiry pulse
feels like and means, can they communicate with each other, and
students correlate the theoretical description of a Wiry pulse with
their own feeling of the pulse.
FEELING AND IDENTIFYING THE
PULSE QUALITY
It should be stressed that the pulse ‘quality’ can be felt and
identified only if we move the fingers constantly by ‘rolling’ them
distally and proximally, ‘pushing’ them medially and laterally, and
‘pressing’ down and releasing upwards as described in the
previous chapter. We cannot feel and identify the pulse quality if
we keep the fingers absolutely still because the fingers need to
feel, probe and explore the shape and size of the pulse and this can
be done only by moving the fingers in all four directions around a
given pulse position (i.e. distally, proximally, medially and
laterally). For example, we can deduce that a pulse is Long or Short
only if we gently roll the finger distally; we can deduce that a pulse
is Slippery only if we feel ‘around’ it by moving the fingers
medially and laterally; we can deduce that a pulse is Floating-
Empty only if we press the fingers down and then release them to
1108
explore its depth.
 
Remember: the pulse qualities cannot be felt by
keeping the fingers absolutely still. The fingers must
feel all around the pulse position, i.e. distally,
proximally, medially, laterally and at different levels.
The pulse qualities discussed are as illustrated in 
Table 50.1
 
.
The order in which I have arranged these 29 pulse qualities is
different from that traditionally used in Chinese books. The first 8
qualities are the traditional, basic ones, that is, Floating, Deep,
Slow, Rapid, Empty, Full, Slippery and Choppy. The other 21
qualities are arranged in three groups:
1109
Table 50.1
The 29 pulse qualities
 
• 
 
from 9 to 17: empty-type qualities
• 
 
from 18 to 24: full-type qualities
• 
 
from 25 to 29: qualities denoting rate or rhythm of
pulse.
In addition to the above 29 traditional qualities, I shall also
discuss three new qualities, mostly owed to Dr Shen’ experience:
Irregular, Stagnant, and Sad.
For each pulse quality, I shall discuss the following:
 
• 
 
pulse description
1110
• 
 
clinical significance
• 
 
combinations
• 
 
differentiation from similar pulses
• 
 
clinical significance in each position according to Li
Shi Zhen.
I have paired the eight basic qualities (Floating/Deep,
Slow/Rapid, Full/Empty and Slippery/Choppy) each with its
opposite. These pulse qualities are considered to be the eight basic
ones because they correspond closely to the eight principles; that
is, Floating and Deep correspond to Exterior and Interior, Slow and
Rapid to Cold and Heat, and Full and Empty to Excess and
deficiency. The Slippery and Choppy qualities are added to this
group of eight basic qualities because they are extremely common,
the former indicating Phlegm or Dampness and the latter Blood
deficiency. These two pulse qualities are paired also because to a
certain extent they are at different ends of a scale in terms of how
they feel under the finger.
Box 50.1
 
summarizes the eight basic pulse qualities.
 
BOX 50.1
 
   
 
THE EIGHT BASIC PULSE
QUALITIES
• 
 
Floating = Exterior
• 
 
Deep = Interior
• 
 
Rapid = Heat
• 
 
Slow = Cold
• 
 
Full = Excess
• 
 
Empty = deficiency
• 
 
Slippery = Phlegm or Dampness
• 
 
Choppy = Blood deficiency
THE EIGHT BASIC PULSE QUALITIES
Floating
1111
Pulse description
This pulse is felt on very light pressure; in extreme cases it is felt
with no pressure at all. As its name implies, it has a ‘floating’
quality and it is relatively resistant to pressure. We can think of a
large plank of wood in water: we can push it down with some
resistance but it comes back up. In other words, there is a
difference between a pulse that is felt clearly on the surface (as it
should be if Yang-Qi is normal) and a pulse that is Floating: the
Floating pulse is more resistant to finger pressure than a pulse
that is normal at the superficial level. Especially in summertime, it
is normal for the pulse to be relatively more superficial but that
does not make it a Floating pulse. Bearing in mind the three levels
of the pulse as discussed in the previous chapter, the Floating
pulse is felt very clearly (and somewhat excessively) on the
superficial level, which corresponds to the Qi and Yang energies.
The traditional description of a Floating pulse was like ‘feathers
being ruffled by the wind’. The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ in 
Chapter
18
 
says: ‘
 
When the pulse is Floating, it is felt moving above the
muscle.’
 
1
Clinical significance
Generally speaking, the Floating pulse indicates the presence of a
pathogenic factor on the Exterior of the body: it is therefore
associated with exterior symptoms caused by invasion of Wind.
Indeed, the presence of aversion to cold, fever (or being hot to the
touch) and a Floating pulse is enough to diagnose an invasion of
an external pathogenic factor. Thus the Floating pulse is one of the
main clinical signs of invasion of Wind. In fact, the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Diseases’ says: ‘
 
A Floating pulse, stiffness and pain
of the neck and aversion to cold are signs of the Greater-Yang
pattern [invasion of Wind].’
 
2
The reason that the pulse becomes floating in invasions of
external pathogenic factors is that when the body is attacked by
external evils the Defensive Qi is attracted to the surface of the
body and the space between skin and muscles, to fight the external
pathogenic factors. Thus, the increased Yang-Qi on the surface of
the body is reflected in a more Yang pulse (i.e. Floating). However,
if the patient has weak Defensive Qi and does not react well to the
1112
invasion of pathogenic factors, the pulse may not be Floating.
The Floating pulse is not found only in exterior conditions but
also occurs in interior ones. I shall therefore discuss the clinical
significance of the Floating pulse, distinguishing between exterior
and interior conditions; this will be done under ‘Combinations’.
Under the following conditions, a Floating pulse is normal and
does not indicate a pathology:
 
• 
 
in an underweight person
• 
 
in very hot weather.
Box 50.2
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Floating pulse.
 
BOX 50.2
 
   
 
FLOATING PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind
• 
 
Yin deficiency (interior conditions)
• 
 
Organ disease (interior conditions)
• 
 
Stomach prolapse (interior conditions)
Combinations
The clinical significance of the Floating pulse combined with other
pulses must be differentiated according to interior or exterior
conditions.
Exterior conditions
In exterior conditions the pulse should be Floating by definition
and is clearly accompanied by exterior symptoms such as an
aversion to cold and the presence of fever. The Floating pulse of
exterior conditions can be combined with other qualities as
follows.
Floating-Full
1113
This indicates an External-Full condition, found when the patient
has a strong Defensive Qi.
Floating-Weak
This indicates an External-Empty condition, found when the
patient has a weak Defensive Qi that does not react properly to the
invasion of external pathogenic factors.
Floating-Slow
This indicates an invasion of Wind-Cold with a prevalence of Wind.
Floating-Tight
This indicates an invasion of Wind-Cold with a prevalence of Cold.
Floating-Empty
This indicates an invasion of Summer-Heat; it is more floating than
the Floating-Empty pulse from Yin deficiency.
Floating-Slippery
This indicates an invasion of Wind-Damp or Wind complicated by
Phlegm.
Interior conditions
The Floating pulse can be found in interior conditions and it is,
indeed, relatively common. In interior conditions, exterior
symptoms such as an aversion to cold and the presence of fever
are obviously absent. Thus, if we feel a Floating pulse, we should
first establish whether the patient’ condition is exterior or interior;
this is easily done because an exterior condition presents with an
acute onset of aversion to cold, fever, body aches, sore throat, etc.
In the absence of such symptoms the condition is interior and we
must therefore interpret the significance of the Floating pulse
differently.
The Floating quality of the pulse in interior conditions is not as
pronounced as in exterior ones; in exterior conditions the pulse is
clearly floating like a piece of wood in water as described above
and is rather resistant to pressure, whereas in interior conditions
the Floating quality of the pulse is less pronounced and is not so
1114
resistant to pressure.
 
The Floating quality of the pulse in interior conditions
is not as pronounced as in exterior ones.
A Floating pulse in an interior condition associated with an
emptiness at the deep level of the pulse generally indicates a
potentially serious problem often with severe Blood, Yin or
Essence deficiency. Thus, a relatively Floating pulse that is Empty
at the deep level in interior conditions may be associated with
anaemia, chronic asthma, cirrhosis of the liver or cancer.
In addition, if the pulse is generally Weak and Deep but Floating
in one particular position, there may be a problem (often organic
rather than just energetic) with the organ corresponding to that
position. For example, if the pulse is generally Weak and Deep in
all positions except in the Heart position, where it is Floating, this
may indicate heart disease.
The Floating pulse without strength in interior conditions may
also be associated with prolapse of the stomach, in which case the
pulse would also be Fine or Soggy.
Box 50.3
 
summarizes Western conditions that may be indicated
by a Floating pulse.
 
BOX 50.3
 
   
 
WESTERN DISEASES
POTENTIALLY INDICATED BY A
FLOATING PULSE
• 
 
Floating-Empty: anaemia, chronic asthma, cirrhosis of
the liver, cancer
• 
 
Floating in one position but Deep-Weak in all others:
potential disease in that organ
• 
 
Floating-Fine or Floating-Soggy: prolapse of the
stomach
If, in the absence of exterior symptoms, the pulse is Floating in
all positions and, although it feels relatively hard on the superficial
1115
level, it disappears on pressure, this indicates that the person is
overworking and pushing himself or herself to the limit; Dr Shen
calls this condition ‘Qi wild’.
The clinical significance of the Floating pulse in interior
conditions needs to be interpreted according to its combinations
as follows.
Floating-Empty
This is a relatively common pulse in interior conditions and it
indicates Yin deficiency. The Floating-Empty pulse is felt clearly
and easily on the superficial level with very light pressure but,
with a deeper pressure, the pulse feels empty. However, the
Floating-Empty pulse is not as floating as the Floating pulse of
exterior conditions.
The emptiness of the pulse at the deep level clearly reflects the
deficiency of Yin. On the other hand, its floating quality at the
superficial level reflects the rising Yang that derives from Yin
deficiency. The Floating-Empty pulse reflects a relatively advanced
condition of Yin deficiency when this gives rise to Floating Yang
and possibly Empty-Heat. There are of course other pulse qualities
that may indicate Yin deficiency such as Fine, Leather or Minute.
Floating-Choppy
This indicates severe Blood deficiency. What is the difference in
the clinical significance between a Choppy pulse (which also
indicates Blood deficiency) and a Floating-Choppy pulse? The
latter indicates a more serious condition of Blood deficiency to
such an extent that there is some Empty-Heat associated with it.
Thus a woman with a Floating-Choppy pulse who is suffering from
Blood deficiency may experience a feeling of heat in the face owing
to Empty-Heat arising from Blood deficiency; this occurs only in
women.
Floating-Hollow
This pulse appears after a haemorrhage. If it is also Rapid,
however, it may indicate a forthcoming haemorrhage.
Floating-Short
1116
This indicates severe deficiency of Qi.
Floating-Rapid
This indicates a serious condition of severe exhaustion (
Xu Lao
 
).
Of course, this applies only if the Floating-Rapid pulse occurs in
interior conditions; in the presence of exterior symptoms, of
course, it indicates an invasion of Wind-Heat and its clinical
significance is therefore completely different.
Floating-Slippery-Rapid
This indicates long-term retention of Phlegm-Heat usually in the
Lungs and is seen in chronic bronchitis.
Floating-Weak
This indicates Yin deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulse qualities
Soggy
The Soggy pulse is soft, without strength, difficult to feel at the
superficial level and comparable with wet cotton wool, whereas the
Floating pulse is easily felt at the superficial level and, although it
decreases in strength when pressed harder, it is not as soft as the
Soggy pulse. However, in interior conditions, the combined
Floating-Weak pulse feels very similar to the Soggy pulse.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This indicates invasion of external Wind with dizziness and
headache, or invasion of Wind-Heat with mucus in the chest.
Middle position
This indicates deficiency of the Spleen with excess of the Liver.
Rear position
This is seen in difficulty in urination and defecation.
1117
Deep
Pulse description
The Deep pulse can be felt only at the middle and deep levels, and
especially the latter. It feels as if it were sunken underneath the
muscle. It was also described in the old books as ‘a stone in the
water’.
The depth at which the pulse is felt needs to be correlated with
the body build of the patient; obviously, in obese patients, the
pulse will be deeper. Thus the description of the Deep pulse is
relative: what feels deep in a thin person may be normal in an
obese person.
Clinical significance
This pulse quality indicates simply that the condition is an interior
one. A further interpretation of the clinical significance of this
pulse must be based on the differentiation between a Deep-Full
and a Deep-Weak pulse.
Deep-Full
The Deep-Full pulse denotes the presence of a pathogenic factor in
the Interior: this could be Cold, Heat, retention of food, stagnation
of Qi or Blood, or accumulation of Water, depending on the
combination with other pulse qualities.
Deep-Weak
The Deep-Weak pulse quality indicates Yang deficiency and it is
very common.
Box 50.4
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Deep pulse.
 
BOX 50.4
 
   
 
DEEP PULSE: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Pathogenic factor in the Interior (Deep-Full)
• 
 
Yang deficiency (Deep-Weak)
Combinations
1118
Deep-Weak
A very common pulse quality, this indicates Yang deficiency. This
pulse is felt at the deep level with moderate pressure and it feels
weak.
Deep-Wiry
This indicates stasis of Blood and a possible pathology of the
Penetrating Vessel.
Deep-Wiry-Slow
This indicates Blood stasis deriving from Cold, or stagnation of
Cold in the Liver channel.
Deep-Slow
This denotes interior Cold.
Deep-Rapid
This indicates interior Heat.
Deep-Soggy-Slow
This denotes Dampness in the Interior, frequently with oedema.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Hidden
The Hidden pulse, essentially the same as the Deep pulse, is an
extreme case of it. The Deep pulse is sunken underneath the
muscle and can be felt clearly with strong pressure, whereas the
Hidden pulse is sunken near the bone and is difficult to feel even
with strong pressure.
Firm
The Firm pulse is a type of Deep pulse in so far as it can be felt
only at the deep level. It is essentially a pulse that is Wiry at the
deep level (the Wiry pulse is felt at all levels).
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
1119
Front position
This indicates Phlegm or Phlegm-Fluids stagnating in the chest.
Middle position
This indicates pain from Cold in the Middle Burner.
Rear position
This is seen in white spermatorrhoea and diarrhoea or lumbago
from Kidney deficiency and abdominal pain.
Slow
Pulse description
In antiquity, the pulse was defined as slow in relation to the
breathing cycles of the doctor. Thus a pulse was described as slow
if it beat three times or less during the time it takes the doctor to
breathe in and out, and as rapid if it beat five times or more during
the same time. Obviously this method relies on the doctor’ being
in good health: it would not work if the doctor suffered from
asthma! Although this method is not used any longer, the
concentration on one’ own breathing focuses and relaxes the
doctor’ mind.
In modern times, the definition of a Slow or Rapid pulse is
related to the pulse rate, which must be correlated to the age of the
patient as follows:
Age
Rate
0–1
120/140
1–3
110
4–10
84/90
11–15
78/80
16–35
76
36–50
72/70
50+
68
Any pulse rate below the above values is therefore a Slow pulse.
Of course these values should not be adhered to rigidly: for
example, a pulse rate of 74 b.p.m. in the 16—35 years age range
would be only very slightly slow and have no clinical significance.
Clinical significance
1120
A Slow pulse almost always indicates a Cold pattern. A different
interpretation of a Slow pulse is that it denotes a problem in the
Yin organs, as opposed to the 
Rapid pulse, which indicates a
problem in the Yang organs; however, this is a broad
generalization and it is not that clinically relevant. The ‘Classic of
Difficulties’ in 
Chapter 9
 
says, 
‘Rapid pulse indicates problems in
the Yang organs, the Slow pulse problems in the Yin organs
 
’.
 
3
The clinical significance of the Slow pulse depends on whether it
is Full or Empty: a Slow and Full pulse indicates Full-Cold,
whereas a Slow and Empty pulse indicates Empty-Cold deriving
from Yang deficiency. A condition of Full-Cold can last only a
relatively short time (a matter of weeks or months) as interior Cold
will eventually injure Yang and lead to Yang deficiency and
therefore Empty-Cold. For this reason, in clinical practice Empty-
Cold is more common than Full-Cold because we generally see
patients with chronic conditions.
If the pulse is very slow, beating only twice for each breath cycle,
it is called a Harmful pulse; if it beats only once per each breath, it
is called the Destroyed pulse. Both these pulses, and especially the
second one, indicate extreme depletion of the Internal Organs and
are always associated with serious conditions.
Common Cold conditions manifesting with a Slow pulse
Common conditions which present with a Slow pulse are Stomach-
Qi deficiency, Spleen-Yang deficiency, Heart-Yang deficiency,
Kidney-Yang deficiency, deficiency of Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
),
Lung-Yang deficiency, Cold in the Stomach, Cold in the Uterus,
abdominal masses, Cold-Phlegm and Damp-Cold.
A Slow pulse in chronic conditions may also indicate a
deficiency of the Original Qi (
Yuan Qi
 
).
Box 50.5
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Slow pulse.
 
BOX 50.5
 
   
 
CONDITIONS COMMONLY
MANIFESTING WITH A SLOW PULSE
• 
 
Stomach-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Spleen-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
1121
• 
 
deficiency of Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
)
• 
 
Lung-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Cold in the Stomach
• 
 
Cold in the Uterus
• 
 
Abdominal masses
• 
 
Cold-Phlegm
• 
 
Damp-Cold
Contradictory manifestations characterized by a Slow pulse
and Heat symptoms
Very occasionally the Slow pulse occurs in combination with Heat
symptoms; one of the reasons for this contradiction may be Damp-
Heat as the Dampness itself may slow the pulse down.
Of course, a contradiction between a Slow pulse and Heat
symptoms may simply be due to the coexistence of Cold and Heat
patterns. For example, the combination of Kidney-Yang deficiency
with Damp-Heat in the Bladder is relatively common. Another
possible common combination is that of Kidney-Yang deficiency
with Liver-Yang rising.
In menopausal women, a simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin
and Kidney-Yang is very common; if the Kidney-Yang deficiency is
more pronounced the pulse may be Slow, but the Kidney-Yin
deficiency will cause some Empty-Heat signs such as hot flushes
and night sweating.
In the context of acute febrile diseases of the Warm-Disease
type, the pulse can be Slow with the pattern of Damp-Heat at the
Defensive-Qi level.
A Slow pulse with Heat symptoms may also indicate the
condition of True Cold and False Heat, but this is quite rare. Yet
another possible explanation of a Slow pulse with Heat symptoms
is when the Heat is so intense that it obstructs the circulation of Qi
and makes the pulse Slow; however, this is also quite rare.
Box 50.6
 
summarizes conditions with contradictory pulse and
Heat symptoms.
 
BOX 50.6
 
   
 
SITUATIONS GIVING RISE
1122
TO CONTRADICTORY SLOW PULSE
AND HEAT SYMPTOMS
• 
 
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Coexistence of Cold and Heat patterns
• 
 
Simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang (with predominance of the latter)
• 
 
Damp-Heat at the Defensive-Qi level in Warm
diseases
• 
 
True Cold and false Heat
• 
 
Intense Heat obstructing the circulation of Qi
The Slow pulse and jogging
Dr Shen relates a Slow pulse always to a Heart disharmony and
poor circulation and, paradoxically, it is often seen in people who
jog a lot: according to Dr Shen, excessive jogging (in his opinion
more than 4 miles a day) leads to a dilation of the blood vessels
which eventually becomes permanent and therefore 
slows the
circulation down so that the pulse becomes Slow.
A Slow pulse is relatively common in Western patients who are
joggers. Indeed, when we feel a Slow pulse, the first question we
should ask is whether the patient jogs regularly. However, this is
not necessarily a ‘false’ sign that should be discounted because it
reflects the fact that excessive jogging injures Yang and leads to
internal Cold. Therefore, although the Slow pulse should be taken
into consideration, it is important also to bear in mind that it may
be ‘disguising’ the presence of Heat.
Situations which may cause a Slow pulse without involving
Heat
The following life situations may cause a Slow pulse:
 
• 
 
old age
• 
 
childbirth
• 
 
excessive consumption of fatty and sweet foods.
1123
A Slow pulse of course appears when a patient is on beta
blockers; in this case it is a false sign and can be ignored.
Combinations
Slow-Floating
This indicates invasion of exterior Wind-Cold with a prevalence of
Wind.
Slow-Deep
This indicates interior Cold (which may be Full or Empty
according to whether the pulse is Full or Empty).
Slow-Slippery
This denotes Cold Phlegm or Damp-Cold.
Slow-Choppy
This indicates Blood deficiency and interior Cold deriving from it.
(A Slow-Slippery pulse indicates a pathology of Qi, whereas a
Slow-Choppy pulse indicates a pathology of Blood.)
Slow-Weak
This denotes Empty-Cold with Yang deficiency.
Slow-Full
This denotes internal Cold and is often seen in chronic, painful
conditions.
Slow-Wiry
This indicates accumulation of Phlegm-Fluids or stagnation of
Cold in the Liver channel.
Slow-Deep-Weak
This may indicate Heart-Yang deficiency with symptoms of cold
limbs, cold feeling, sweating and depression.
Slow-Tight-Overflowing
This indicates that the blood vessels are dilated: in a young person
1124
this is often due to excessive jogging, whereas in the elderly it may
indicate hardening of the blood vessels.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Slowed-Down
This pulse has four beats per breathing cycle, whereas the Slow
pulse has three beats or less.
Knotted
This pulse is slow and it stops at irregular intervals, whereas the
Slow pulse is regular.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This indicates deficiency and Cold in the Upper Burner.
Middle position
This is seen in pain from Cold in the Middle Burner.
Rear position
This is seen in backache and leg ache with a feeling of heaviness
from Kidney deficiency.
Rapid
Pulse description
The Rapid pulse has six beats or more to each breathing cycle; in
modern clinical practice a pulse is defined as being Rapid when it
beats more times than the values indicated under the Slow pulse
above. For example, a pulse rate of 82 b.p.m. in the age range 16—
35 indicates a Rapid pulse.
Clinical significance
The Rapid pulse always indicates Heat, which may be Full or
Empty according to whether the pulse is Full or Empty. Typical
1125
examples of a pulse that is Rapid and of the Full-type are Rapid-
Wiry, indicating Liver-Fire, or Rapid-Slippery, indicating Phlegm-
Fire.
Examples of a pulse that is Rapid and of the Empty-type are
Rapid-Fine, indicating Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, or Rapid
and Floating-Empty, also indicating Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat. It is important to stress that, in Yin deficiency, a Rapid pulse
indicates the presence of Empty-Heat rather than Yin deficiency
itself; this is manifested by the pulse being either Fine or Floating-
Empty. This is equivalent to the situation in tongue diagnosis
when, in Yin deficiency, a Red tongue body indicates the presence
of Empty-Heat rather than the presence of Yin deficiency itself,
which would be manifested by the absence of coating.
 
Yin deficiency is indicated by a Floating-Empty pulse; it
is only when it is also Rapid that Empty-Heat is
indicated.
As mentioned above under the Slow pulse, the ‘Classic of
Difficulties’ relates the Rapid pulse to problems of the Yang
organs, and the Slow pulse to problems of the Yin organs. Of
course, this is a broad generalization which suffers from
exceptions (e.g. Liver-Fire may manifest with a Rapid pulse).
Common conditions which present with a Rapid pulse include
Stomach-Heat, Heat in the Intestines, Lung-Heat, Liver-Fire, Heart-
Fire, Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, Phlegm-Heat, Damp-Heat
and invasion of Wind-Heat. The Rapid pulse is also seen in the
Lilium Syndrome described in 
Chapter 3
 
of the ‘Synopsis of
Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet’.
 
4
Box 50.7
 
summarizes the common clinical manifestations of a
Rapid pulse.
 
BOX 50.7
 
   
 
COMMON CONDITIONS
MANIFESTING WITH A RAPID PULSE
• 
 
Stomach-Heat
• 
 
Heat in the Large Intestine
• 
 
Lung-Heat
1126
• 
 
Liver-Fire
• 
 
Heart-Fire
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Damp-Heat
• 
 
Invasion of Wind-Heat
• 
 
Lilium Syndrome
In fevers, whether of internal or external origin, the pulse should
be Rapid; if it is not, this is a serious sign.
 
In fevers, if the pulse is not Rapid this is a bad sign.
However, there are a few situations when a Rapid pulse does not
indicate Heat because the clinical manifestations do not point to
Heat. When we feel a Rapid pulse, it is important to check this
against the tongue and the inside of the lower eyelids: in true
conditions of Heat, the tongue will be Red and the inside of the
lower eyelids will also be red.
The following are examples of situations when the Rapid pulse
does not correspond to Heat.
 
• 
 
The pulse can become Rapid following an emotional
upset
 
, such as a shock or an outburst of anger. Thus if
we see a patient whose clinical manifestations do not
point to Heat and the pulse is Rapid, we should always
ask whether they have had an emotional upset recently
(within hours or days). The ‘Simple Questions’, in
Chapter 17
 
, says, 
‘A Rapid pulse may indicate that a
person has suffered a sudden fright and the pulse will
revert back to normal in three to four days.’
 
5
• 
 
The pulse can become Rapid when a person suffering
from Qi and Blood deficiency works very hard, pushing
himself or herself to the limit.
 
In such a case the pulse
becomes Rapid manifesting an attempt by the body’ Qi
1127
to cope with such demands: Dr J. H. F. Shen describes
this situation as ‘Qi wild’ when the pulse is also
Overflowing. The ‘Complete Book of Jing Yue’ confirms
this by saying that one of the causes of a Rapid pulse
may be exhaustion (
Xu Lao
 
).
 
6
 
If the pulse is Rapid and
Big but also Empty, this may indicate severe exhaustion
of Essence and Blood which occur also without Empty-
Heat.
• 
 
The pulse can become Rapid in advanced cases of
cancer
 
, even in the absence of a Heat pattern. In a
patient suffering from cancer this is often a bad sign
indicating a poor prognosis and, potentially, a rapid
spread of the cancer.
• 
 
The pulse can become Rapid in extreme Qi deficiency
, again reflecting an attempt by the body’ Qi to cope
with its demands.
• 
 
The pulse can become Rapid in Yin Fire.
 
The concept
of Yin Fire was introduced by Li Dong Yuan in his
famous ‘Discussion on Stomach and Spleen’ (
Pi Wei Lun
, 1249). According to Li Dong Yuan irregular diet,
overwork and emotional stress weaken the Stomach and
Spleen and the Original Qi (
Yuan Qi
 
). When the
Original Qi declines, the Minister Fire becomes
pathological and rises from the space between the
Kidneys to harass the Heart and Pericardium; Li Dong
Yuan called this Yin Fire (not to be confused with
Empty-Heat). The pathological Minister Fire (i.e. Yin
Fire) ‘displaces’ the Original Qi because they both
occupy the same space in between the Kidneys; for this
reason Li Dong Yuan says that the Yin Fire is a ‘thief’ of
the Original Qi. Thus 
in this kind of pathology there
may be some Cold symptoms and signs arising from a
deficiency of the Original Qi (such as cold feet, a feeling
of cold and a Pale tongue) and some Heat
manifestations from the rising of the Yin Fire (such as a
feeling of heat in the face and a Rapid pulse). Arousal of
the Yin Fire is treated not by clearing Heat but by
tonifying the Original Qi with sweet and warm herbs;
1128
the representative formula for this is Bu Zhong Yi Qi
Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
(
Tonify Qi and Ease the Muscles
 
in the 
Three Treasures
 
).
    
 
As Yin Fire derives from a deficiency of the Original
Qi, if the latter predominates, the pulse may be Slow
rather than Rapid.
• 
 
A Rapid pulse may also simply indicate nervous
tension without any Heat.
 
This is usually found in
people who are constitutionally nervous: these patients
will most probably have a Heart crack on the tongue.
Box 50.8
 
summarizes those situations when a Rapid pulse does
not correspond to Heat.
 
BOX 50.8
 
   
 
SITUATIONS WHEN THE
PULSE IS RAPID FOR REASONS
OTHER THAN HEAT
• 
 
Emotional upset
• 
 
Severe Qi and Blood deficiency from overwork
• 
 
Cancer
• 
 
Extreme Qi deficiency
• 
 
Yin Fire
• 
 
Nervous tension
The following factors may also cause the pulse to become
temporarily Rapid in the absence of Heat: vigorous physical
exercise, heavy meals, alcohol, smoking, tea, coffee, fright,
emotional upsets, certain herbs such as Ma Huang 
Ephedrae sinicae
or Ren Shen 
Radix Panax Ginseng
 
and anaemia.
Combinations
Rapid-Full
This indicates the presence of Full-Heat from Excess of Yang.
1129
Rapid-Empty
This indicates Empty-Heat from deficiency of Yin.
Rapid-Floating
This denotes invasion of external Wind-Heat.
Rapid-Deep
This indicates interior Heat.
Rapid-Overflowing
This indicates Full-Heat usually in the Stomach, Lungs or Heart.
Rapid-Fine
This denotes Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency.
Rapid-Floating-Empty
This indicates Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency.
Rapid-Wiry
This indicates Liver-Fire.
Rapid-Slippery
This denotes Phlegm-Heat.
Rapid-Deep-Full
This indicates interior Fire in the Stomach and the Intestines.
Rapid-Wiry-Big
This indicates Blood-Heat. According to Dr Shen, this pulse may
be seen when there is too much glucose or cholesterol in the
blood.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Hasty
The Hasty pulse is rapid and stops at irregular intervals, whereas
the Rapid pulse is regular.
1130
Hurried
The Hurried pulse beats seven to eight times per breath cycle, it is
regular and it gives the sensation of being hurried and anxious. It
feels extremely agitated and urgent.
Moving
The Moving pulse is rapid and short, it is shaped like a bean and
gives the impression of vibrating rather than pulsating. The Rapid
pulse is simply rapid and does not have any of the above
attributes.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in sore throat, tongue or mouth ulcers, vomiting of
blood, cough and lung abcess.
Middle position
This indicates Stomach-Fire if on the right Middle position, and
Liver-Fire if on the left Middle position.
Rear position
This indicates the need to nourish the Yin and clear Fire.
Empty
Pulse description
The Empty pulse has no strength and disappears with a light
pressure, feeling empty; it is soft but also 
relatively
 
big and
distended at the superficial level.
Clinical significance
The Empty pulse indicates Qi deficiency at its beginning or middle
stages; in chronic Qi deficiency, the Empty pulse will usually
become Weak (see below). Since most of the patients we see suffer
from chronic conditions, the classic Empty pulse is relatively rare.
When discussing the clinical significance of the 
‘Empty’ pulse, it is
1131
important to be precise about one’ terminology: there is a
difference between the classic ‘Empty’ pulse as defined above,
indicating purely Qi deficiency, and an empty-type pulse, which
encompasses a broad range of deficient pulses, such as Weak, Fine,
Choppy, etc. It is therefore important, especially in training clinics,
not to use the word ‘Empty’ in a loose sense but only to indicate a
precise pulse quality.
 
Remember: do not confuse the specific ‘Empty’ pulse
quality with a generic, loosely defined ‘empty-type’ of
pulse.
The Empty pulse is most common on the Lung position and in
chronic conditions it may indicate Lung exhaustion (
Fei Xu Lao
 
).
If the pulse is Empty and relatively Floating and without
strength in all three positions, especially of the left, it indicates
Blood deficiency.
If the pulse is Empty and slightly Rapid in acute exterior
syndromes, it indicates invasion of Summer-Heat.
Box 50.9
 
summarizes the clinical significance of an Empty pulse.
 
BOX 50.9
 
   
 
EMPTY PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Blood deficiency (slightly Floating)
• 
 
Summer-Heat (slightly Rapid)
Combinations
Empty-Floating without strength
This indicates Blood deficiency.
Empty-Rapid
In exterior syndromes this may denote invasion of Summer-Heat.
In interior syndromes it may indicate the rising of Yin Fire from a
1132
deficiency of Original Qi as described above under the Rapid
pulse.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Weak
The Weak pulse is slightly deeper than the Empty pulse and
therefore requires a slightly harder finger pressure and it lacks the
relatively big and distended quality of the Empty pulse; it is also
softer than the Empty pulse.
Choppy
The Choppy pulse is deeper than the Empty pulse, it lacks its
relatively big and distended quality, it is weaker than the Empty
pulse and it lacks a wave. By contrast, the Empty pulse has a wave.
The Choppy pulse also feels ‘jagged’, whereas the Empty pulse
feels quite rounded.
Hollow
The Hollow pulse is empty only at the middle level and can be felt
at the superficial and deep levels; the Empty pulse is empty at the
superficial level and is softer than the Hollow pulse.
Soggy
The Soggy pulse is soft and without strength but also slightly
floating, whereas the Empty pulse is bigger and not floating.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This indicates deficient Blood not nourishing the Heart.
Middle position
This is found in abdominal distension, retention of food and Qi
stagnation.
Rear position
This indicates Atrophy or Painful Obstruction Syndrome from
1133
steaming of the bones injuring Essence and Blood with deficiency
in the Lower Burner.
Full
Pulse description
The Full pulse feels hard, full and long; it is felt easily at all levels
and it has a springy quality resistant to finger pressure.
Clinical significance
The Full pulse simply indicates the presence of a Full pattern; its
precise clinical significance can be deduced only from its
combination with other qualities. When discussing the clinical
significance of the ‘Full’ pulse, it is important to be precise about
terminology: there is a difference between the classic ‘Full’ pulse
as defined above, indicating purely a Full condition, and a full-type
pulse, which encompasses a broad range of full pulses, such as
Wiry, Slippery, Tight, Big, Overflowing, etc. It is therefore
important, especially in training clinics, not to use the word ‘Full’
in a loose sense but only to indicate a precise pulse quality.
A proper identification of the Full pulse is essential to determine
the correct principle of treatment in chronic conditions which are
usually characterized by the simultaneous presence of Full and
Empty patterns. In such cases, we must have a clear idea in mind
as to what our treatment strategy should be, that is, tonify 
the
body’ Qi or expel pathogenic factors. When we are confronted by
these alternative treatment strategies, the pulse quality is
extremely important in our deciding which one to choose; if the
pulse is Full it is usually better to concentrate our attention on
expelling pathogenic factors, even if the condition is chronic.
Postviral fatigue syndrome is a case in point. In this condition
there is nearly always deficiency, usually of Qi, and Excess, usually
of Dampness, and I often base my decision whether to tonify Qi or
resolve Dampness on the pulse quality: if it is Full or of the full
type, I start by resolving Dampness rather than tonifying Qi. The
same principle applies to any chronic conditions manifesting with
simultaneous deficiency and Excess.
Box 50.10
 
summarizes the common conditions presenting with a
1134
Full pulse.
 
BOX 50.10
 
   
 
COMMON CONDITIONS
MANIFESTING WITH A FULL PULSE
• 
 
Heart-, Stomach- or Liver-Fire
• 
 
Retention of Food
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Full Cold
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi/Blood
Combinations
Full-Rapid
This indicates Full-Heat.
Full-Slow
This indicates Full-Cold.
Full-Tight
This denotes Full-Cold.
Full-Slippery
This indicates Phlegm.
Full-Long
This indicates Heat.
Full-Wiry
This indicates a Full Liver pattern.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Overflowing
The Overflowing pulse is large, long and relatively floating and it
decreases in strength when pressed heavily. The Full pulse is not
so long, not so floating and does not decrease in strength when
1135
pressed heavily.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in invasion of Wind-Heat in the head and face, sore
throat, stiff tongue and a feeling of fullness in the chest.
Middle position
This is found in Heat in the Spleen, abdominal distension and
fullness.
Rear position
This is found in backache, abdominal pain and constipation.
Slippery
Pulse description
The Slippery pulse feels slippery or ‘oily’: it is rounded, ‘slips’ or
slides under the finger and flows smoothly. In ancient times, it was
described as feeling like ‘pearls rolling in a basin’ or ‘raindrops
rolling on a lotus leaf’. Students can get a good idea of what a
Slippery pulse is by feeling the pulse of a pregnant woman in an
advanced stage of pregnancy; most probably, the pulse will be very
Slippery (if it is not, this is a bad sign).
Clinical significance
The Slippery pulse indicates primarily Phlegm or retention of
food; it may also indicate Blood stasis. Generally speaking, the
Slippery pulse is full by definition indicating the presence of
Phlegm; however, it may also be combined with empty-type pulses
reflecting the simultaneous deficiency of Qi and the presence of
Phlegm (which usually derive from Qi deficiency).
Although the Slippery pulse is traditionally associated with
Phlegm, it may also be seen in cases of chronic Dampness; for
example, it is very common in chronic cases of postviral fatigue
syndrome with clear manifestations of Dampness.
It is normal for the pulse to become Slippery during pregnancy
1136
and, indeed, it indicates a healthy pregnancy. Conversely, if the
pulse is not Slippery during pregnancy, it is not a good sign and it
may indicate impending problems; in such cases, the woman
should be treated even in the absence of symptoms. In particular,
there are certain pulse qualities which are undesirable during
pregnancy, such as Choppy, Choppy-Wiry, Fine, Weak, Leather and
Hollow, all of which may indicate the possibility of miscarriage.
According to some Chinese sources, a Slippery pulse that is
Slowed-Down and relatively soft indicates health.
Common conditions manifesting with a Slippery pulse include a
whole range of diseases characterized by Phlegm in all of its
manifestations (i.e. Phlegm-Heat, Cold-Phlegm, Damp-Phlegm,
Wind-Phlegm, etc.). In the organs, Phlegm can be retained
primarily in the Lungs, Stomach and Heart (non-substantial
Phlegm misting the Mind). Phlegm in the Lungs is extremely
common and a good example of a Slippery pulse is that felt in a
patient with acute or chronic bronchitis.
Conditions other than Phlegm, such as Damp-Heat or retention
of food, may also lead to a Slippery pulse.
According to Dr Shen, when a Slippery quality is felt only in one
position, it does not necessarily indicate Dampness or Phlegm. For
example, he attributes the following clinical significance to a
Slippery quality in individual positions:
 
• 
 
Lungs: Phlegm
• 
 
Stomach: excessive acidity
• 
 
Bladder: disturbance of bladder function
• 
 
Heart: heart-valve problem
• 
 
Liver: disturbance of liver function
• 
 
Gall-Bladder: gallstones
• 
 
Kidney: kidney infection.
Box 50.11
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Slippery
pulse.
 
BOX 50.11
 
   
 
SLIPPERY PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
1137
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Retention of food
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Dampness (chronic)
• 
 
Pregnancy
Combinations
Slippery-Floating
This indicates Wind-Phlegm.
Slippery-Deep
This indicates Phlegm or retention of food.
Slippery-Rapid
This indicates Damp-Heat or Phlegm-Heat.
Slippery-Slow
This indicates Damp-Cold or Cold-Phlegm (it is often seen in
diarrhoea).
Slippery-Big
This denotes Phlegm-Heat with the predominance of Heat.
Slippery-Short
This indicates Dampness or Phlegm against a background of Qi
deficiency.
Slippery-Weak
This indicates Dampness or Phlegm against a background of Qi
deficiency.
Li Shi Zhen summarizes the combinations of Slippery pulses as
follows:
 
• 
 
Slippery-Floating: Wind-Phlegm
1138
• 
 
Slippery-Deep: Phlegm with retention of food
• 
 
Slippery-Rapid: Phlegm-Fire
• 
 
Slippery-Slow: retention of food.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Moving
The Moving pulse is rounded like the Slippery pulse but it is also
short, is shaped like a bean and gives the impression of vibrating
rather than pulsating.
Soggy
The Soggy pulse is very slightly slippery, as well as being soft and
relatively floating. The Slippery pulse is much fuller than the
Soggy pulse and is not soft.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in Phlegm in the chest or diaphragm, vomiting,
vomiting of sour fluids, stiff tongue and cough.
Middle position
This indicates retention of food or Heat in the Spleen and Liver.
Rear position
This is found in diabetes, diarrhoea, hernia and Painful Urination
Syndrome.
Choppy
Pulse description
The Choppy pulse feels rough, ‘jagged’ and short. It flows without
a ‘wave’, the normal pulse flows from the Rear position to the
Front with a smooth and continuous movement like a sea wave.
1139
The Choppy pulse lacks this continuous movement between the
three positions and does not feel like a wave; this is an important
difference from a normal pulse as the Choppy pulse is felt within
each position separately (
Fig. 50.1
 
).
FIG. 50.1
 
The Choppy pulse quality in relation to a wave
For this reason, when deciding whether or not a pulse is Choppy,
it is important to feel the pulse with three fingers to detect the
presence or absence of the wave between the three positions.
However, this does not mean that the pulse may not be Choppy in
one position only.
 
The Choppy pulse must be felt with three fingers
simultaneously.
There are many other ways of describing the Choppy pulse.
First, it appears to be flowing vertically up and down rather than
horizontally. It also gives the impression of coming and going, of
being stagnant and not flowing properly. One description is ‘the
throb of the beat arrives but not all at once; it falls away but not
immediately’. Another characteristic of the Choppy pulse is that it
may appear to change quality and strength as we feel it.
In ancient times it was described as ‘a knife scraping bamboo’ or
‘raindrops in the sand’. Some Chinese books describe this pulse as
a ‘three-five pulse’ meaning that it changes rate frequently,
sometimes beating three times and sometimes five times per
1140
respiration. Other authors say that the Choppy pulse combines
three qualities: it is Slow, Fine and Short.
Box 50.12
 
summarizes these descriptions of a Choppy pulse.
 
BOX 50.12
 
   
 
DESCRIPTIONS OF THE
CHOPPY PULSE QUALITY
• 
 
Rough, jagged and short
• 
 
Without a wave
• 
 
Gives the impression of flowing vertically rather than
horizontally
• 
 
Gives the impression of coming and going
• 
 
Stagnant, not flowing properly
• 
 
The throb of the beat arrives but not all at once: it
falls away but not immediately
• 
 
It may change quality and strength as we feel it
• 
 
Knife scraping bamboo
• 
 
Raindrops in the sand
• 
 
Changes rate frequently
• 
 
It is a combination of three qualities: Slow, Fine and
Short
Clinical significance
The Choppy pulse indicates a deficiency of Blood or Essence. It
may also indicate loss of Body Fluids occurring after profuse
sweating, vomiting or diarrhoea. In a pregnant woman, a Choppy
pulse is always a bad sign, at the beginning of term indicating the
possibility of miscarriage and towards the end of term indicating
the possibility of eclampsia. In men, a Choppy pulse indicates
deficiency of Essence, which may derive from excessive sexual
activity.
Besides Blood deficiency, the Choppy pulse may also indicate
Blood stasis but only when this occurs against a background of
deficiency of Qi or Blood.
Generally speaking, the Choppy pulse is, of course, by definition
of the empty type. However, although the Choppy pulse is short,
rough, jagged and lacking a wave, it can also be relatively Full. The
1141
word ‘relatively’ is important in the description of this pulse
combination, as the Choppy-Full pulse is not nearly as full as the
Full pulse. The Choppy and relatively Full pulse often indicates
Blood stasis rather than Blood deficiency, frequently deriving from
emotional problems.
The Choppy pulse generally indicates the patterns of Blood
deficiency (especially in women), Essence deficiency (especially in
men) and Blood stasis. Common conditions presenting with these
patterns and a Choppy pulse include heart disease, Chest Painful
Obstruction Syndrome, many menstrual disorders, postnatal
disorders such as depression, and cancer.
Box 50.13
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Choppy
pulse.
 
BOX 50.13
 
   
 
CHOPPY PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Essence deficiency
• 
 
Body Fluids deficiency
• 
 
Blood stasis
Combinations
Choppy-Weak
This indicates depletion of both Qi and Blood.
Choppy-Minute
This indicates extreme Blood deficiency.
Choppy-Soggy
This denotes Qi and Blood deficiency with some Dampness and is
very common.
Choppy-Floating
This indicates an invasion of external Wind occurring against a
background of Qi and Blood deficiency.
1142
Choppy-Deep
This indicates chronic Blood deficiency.
Choppy-Full
This may indicate Blood stasis.
Choppy-Knotted
This indicates Blood stasis deriving from Yang deficiency and
internal Cold.
Choppy-Fine
This indicates deficiency of Body Fluids.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Weak
The Weak pulse is deep, weak and soft but it has a wave; the
Choppy pulse is rough, jagged, not so soft and lacks a wave.
Minute
The Minute pulse is very fine, almost blurred, whereas the Choppy
pulse is not so fine.
Fine
The Fine pulse is thin but well defined and with a wave. The shape
of the Choppy pulse is less well defined and it lacks a wave.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in Heart-Qi deficiency and pain in the chest.
Middle position
This is found in Stomach and Spleen deficiency and hypochondrial
distension.
Rear position
This is found in injury of Essence and Blood, Painful Urination
1143
Syndrome, constipation and blood in the stools.
EMPTY-TYPE PULSES
Weak
Pulse description
As the Weak pulse cannot be felt at the superficial level it is, by
definition, Deep. It feels soft and without strength. When
discussing the clinical significance of the ‘Weak’ pulse, it is
important to be precise about one’ terminology: there is a
difference between the classic ‘Weak’ pulse as defined above,
indicating purely Yang deficiency, and a weak-type pulse that
encompasses a broad range of deficient pulses, such as Empty,
Fine, Choppy, Soggy, etc. It is therefore important, especially in
training clinics, to use the word ‘Weak’ not in a loose sense but
only to indicate a precise pulse quality.
 
The Weak pulse is not just ‘weak’ but a precise pulse
quality: it is extremely common.
Clinical significance
The Weak pulse indicates Yang deficiency; it is a very common
pulse in chronic conditions, more so than the Empty pulse.
However, it may also indicate Blood deficiency or deficiency of the
Original Qi.
If the pulse is relatively Floating at the middle level and very
Weak at the deep level, this indicates severe deficiency of Blood
with collapse of the blood vessels.
According to Dr Shen, we can differentiate the Weak pulse at the
superficial, middle or deep level. A Weak quality at the superficial
level indicates Yang deficiency and it may be due to overwork; if
the pulse becomes Weak at the superficial level in the short term,
this indicates lack of sleep. A Weak quality at the middle level
indicates Blood deficiency, whereas a Weak quality at the deep
1144
level indicates Yin deficiency.
Common conditions presenting with a Weak pulse are Yang
deficiency, Blood deficiency and deficiency of the Original Qi.
These patterns, presenting with a Weak pulse, are common in
many digestive diseases, menstrual disorders, profuse sweating,
nocturnal emissions and haemorrhages.
Box 50.14
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a weak pulse.
 
BOX 50.14
 
   
 
WEAK PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Yang deficiency
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
deficiency of Original Qi
• 
 
Yin deficiency (deep level)
Combinations
Weak-Choppy
This indicates Blood deficiency.
Weak-Fine
This indicates severe Blood deficiency.
Weak-Slow
This indicates Yang deficiency.
Weak-Rapid
This indicates bleeding from Qi deficiency.
Weak-Soggy
This denotes Yang deficiency with some Dampness.
Weak-Floating
This indicates Qi deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
1145
Empty
The Empty pulse is soft, relatively big and can be felt at a
superficial level, whereas the Weak pulse is thinner and can be felt
only at the middle and deep levels.
Choppy
The Choppy pulse is rough, jagged and lacks a wave. The Weak
pulse is softer but it has a wave.
Fine
The Fine pulse is thin but distinct, while the Weak pulse is soft and
has no distinct shape.
Soggy
The Soggy pulse is soft and weak but also relatively floating,
whereas the Weak pulse is not at all floating and cannot be felt on
the superficial level.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This indicates Yang deficiency.
Middle position
This indicates Stomach and Spleen deficiency.
Rear position
This denotes decline of Yang-Qi, or exhaustion of Yin-Essence.
Fine
Pulse description
The Fine pulse is thin and thread-like but it is clear and straight,
although soft. It feels like a fine line under the finger.
Clinical significance
The Fine pulse indicates primarily a severe deficiency of Blood but
1146
also of Qi. The ‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 17
 
says: ‘
 
The Fine
pulse indicates Qi deficiency.’
 
7
 
Compared with the Choppy pulse,
the Fine pulse indicates a more severe deficiency of Blood. It may
also indicate Yin deficiency.
The Fine pulse is obviously of the empty type by definition but it
may be combined with full-type qualities, such as Wiry or Tight.
The Fine pulse with strength indicates Dampness.
A Fine and Weak pulse in very young people indicates a
constitutional deficiency of Original Qi.
The Fine pulse is a very common pulse quality, mostly appearing
in Blood or Yin deficiency, or both. Diseases commonly presenting
with this pulse include digestive diseases, diarrhoea and
menstrual disorders.
Box 50.15
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Fine pulse.
 
BOX 50.15
 
   
 
FINE PULSE: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Blood deficiency
• 
 
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Yin deficiency
• 
 
Dampness (Fine with strength)
• 
 
deficiency of the Original Qi (Fine and Weak in the
very young)
Combinations
Fine-Rapid
This indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Fine-Wiry
This indicates Liver-Qi stagnation or Liver-Yang rising occurring
against a background of Blood deficiency.
Fine-Tight
This indicates Empty-Cold occurring against a background of
Blood deficiency.
1147
Fine-Choppy
This indicates severe Blood or Essence deficiency.
Fine-Deep
This indicates retention of Dampness, as often seen in Painful
Obstruction Syndrome.
Fine-Weak
This indicates severe Blood deficiency and it is often seen in night
sweating.
According to Dr Shen, a Fine-Weak pulse in a middle-aged
person means that he or she has overworked or overexercised
between the ages of 15 and 20.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Choppy
The Choppy pulse is rough, and jagged, lacks a wave and is rather
indistinct. The Fine pulse is thin but clear and distinct and has a
wave.
Minute
The Minute pulse is nothing but an extreme case of Fine pulse; it is
simply thinner than the Fine pulse.
Weak
The Weak pulse is softer and less well defined than the Fine pulse.
It is also missing at the superficial level, whereas the Fine pulse
can be felt at the superficial level.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in chronic vomiting.
Middle position
This is found in abdominal distension and Stomach and Spleen
deficiency.
1148
Rear position
This is found in Cold in the Lower Burner, diarrhoea and nocturnal
emissions.
Minute
Pulse description
The Minute pulse is very thin, almost blurred; it is basically an
extreme case of a Fine pulse. It is almost imperceptible under the
finger.
Clinical significance
The Minute pulse indicates severe deficiency of Blood, Essence or
Yin; it may also indicate deficiency of the Original Qi. It is only
seen in chronic conditions and it indicates a poor prognosis; it is
often seen in cancer.
Common conditions which present with a Minute pulse include
haemorrhages, spontaneous sweating, nocturnal emissions,
chronic diarrhoea, menstrual diseases, collapse of Yang and
chronic vomiting.
Box 50.16
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Minute pulse.
 
BOX 50.16
 
   
 
MINUTE PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Severe Blood deficiency
• 
 
Severe Yin deficiency
• 
 
Severe Essence deficiency
• 
 
deficiency of the Original Qi
Combinations
Minute-Rapid
This indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Minute-Slow
1149
This indicates severe Qi and Blood deficiency with internal Cold.
Minute-Choppy
This indicates exhaustion of Blood.
Minute-Soggy
This indicates Qi and Blood deficiency with some Dampness.
Minute-Deep
This indicates Yin deficiency.
Minute-Wiry
This indicates Liver-Yang rising occurring against a background of
severe Blood deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Fine
The Minute pulse is nothing but an extreme case of Fine pulse; it is
simply thinner than the Fine pulse.
Weak
The Weak pulse is deep and soft but not so thin and imperceptible
as the Minute pulse.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in breathlessness and palpitations.
Middle position
This is found in abdominal distension and fullness, and Stomach
and Spleen deficiency.
Rear position
This is found in deficiency of Blood, exhaustion of Essence,
diabetes and abdominal pain.
1150
Soggy (Weak-Floating)
Pulse description
The Soggy (also called Weak-Floating) pulse can only be felt at the
superficial level; it is relatively floating but weak and soft like wet
cotton-wool or wet bread. It disappears when a stronger pressure
is applied. In Chinese it is called 
ru
 
, which means ‘sodden’, but
also 
ruan
 
, which means ‘soft’.
In my previous books, I call this pulse quality ‘Weak-Floating’,
which describes well its characteristic of being weak, soft but also
slightly floating.
Clinical significance
The Soggy pulse indicates chronic Qi deficiency with retention of
Dampness. It is a relatively common pulse quality in chronic
conditions with Dampness, such as postviral fatigue syndrome.
The Soggy pulse also indicates Stomach-Qi deficiency.
Common conditions presenting with a Soggy pulse are digestive
disorders, chronic fatigue syndrome, asthma, nocturnal emissions
and diarrhoea.
Box 50.17
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Soggy pulse.
 
BOX 50.17
 
   
 
SOGGY PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Chronic Qi deficiency with Dampness
Combinations
Soggy-Fine
This indicates severe Spleen-Qi deficiency with chronic retention
of Dampness.
Soggy-Choppy
This indicates exhaustion of Blood.
Soggy-Floating
1151
This denotes deficiency of Defensive Qi.
Soggy-Wiry
This denotes Dampness with Liver-Qi stagnation.
Soggy-Rapid
This indicates Damp-Heat.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Empty
The Empty pulse feels soft but relatively big and floating, whereas
the Soggy pulse is thinner, weaker, softer and less floating.
Weak
The Weak pulse is soft and can be felt only at the deep level,
whereas the Soggy pulse is also soft but can be felt at the
superficial level.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is found in decline of Yang-Qi with incessant sweating.
Middle position
This denotes deficiency of Central Qi.
Rear position
This denotes injury of Essence and Blood, deficient Cold in the
Lower Burner; warm and tonify the true Yin to bring about an
improvement.
Short
Pulse description
The Short pulse does not fill a pulse position. Within each position
it can be felt in the centre but it tapers off at the head and tail. The
Short pulse is more commonly felt in the Front and Middle
1152
positions, especially the former.
Clinical significance
The Short pulse indicates severe deficiency of Qi, especially of the
Lungs and Heart.
Common patterns which present with a Short pulse are Lung-Qi
deficiency, Heart-Qi deficiency, Stomach-Qi deficiency and
deficiency of Qi and Blood.
Box 50.18
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Short pulse.
 
BOX 50.18
 
   
 
SHORT PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Qi (of Lungs, Heart or Stomach)
• 
 
deficiency of Qi and Blood
Combinations
Short-Floating
This indicates Lung-Qi deficiency.
Short-Choppy
This denotes Heart-Qi deficiency.
Short-Rapid
This indicates severe Heart-Blood deficiency with Empty- Heat.
Short-Slow
This indicates Yang deficiency with internal Cold.
Short-Deep
This indicates accumulation in the Interior with Spleen deficiency.
Short-Hasty
This indicates stagnation of Qi with non-substantial Phlegm or
retention of food.
1153
Differentiation of similar pulses
Moving
The Moving pulse is short, shaped like a bean, rapid and gives the
impression of vibrating rather than pulsating. The Short pulse
shares with the moving pulse only the characteristic of being
short, but none of the others.
Empty
The Empty pulse is soft and relatively floating and, like the Short
pulse, indicates Qi deficiency. The Short pulse is neither soft nor
floating.
Weak
The Weak pulse is soft and can be felt only at the middle and deep
levels but is not short. The Short pulse can be felt at all levels.
Hidden
The Hidden pulse is very deep and difficult to feel but it occupies
its normal pulse position, whereas the Short pulse does not fill its
pulse position.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
Hollow
Pulse description
The Hollow pulse can be felt at the superficial and deep levels but
not at the middle one; it is, as its name implies, hollow like an
onion stalk. This pulse also feels quite solid on the sides of the
fingers when rolling the fingers from side to side.
Clinical significance
The Hollow pulse indicates loss of Blood and it appears after a
haemorrhage. It should be stressed that this indicates a
pathological haemorrhage and not, for example, the normal
1154
menstrual bleeding. It may also appear after a profuse loss of Body
Fluids from sweating, vomiting or diarrhoea. If the pulse is Hollow
and Rapid, it may indicate a 
forthcoming
 
haemorrhage. The Hollow
pulse is not common.
Box 50.19
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Hollow pulse.
 
BOX 50.19
 
   
 
HOLLOW PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Loss of blood
• 
 
Loss of Body Fluids
Combinations
Hollow-Floating
This indicates injury of Qi and Yin.
Hollow-Rapid
This indicates Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat or an impending
haemorrhage.
Hollow-Empty-Soggy
This indicates loss of Essence or depletion of Blood.
Hollow-Knotted
This indicates Yang deficiency or Blood stasis.
Hollow-Slow
This indicates loss of Blood and injury of the Upright Qi.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Choppy
The Choppy pulse is generally empty, rough and without a wave,
whereas the Hollow pulse has a definite shape and a wave but is
empty only at the middle level.
1155
Empty
The Empty pulse is relatively superficial and soft and disappears
with a relatively light pressure. The Hollow pulse is neither
superficial nor soft; it disappears with a stronger pressure but it
has more shape than the Empty pulse.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
Leather
Pulse description
The Leather pulse can be felt at a superficial level, stretched like
the skin of a drum and empty at the deep 
level; it feels hard on the
outside but empty inside, like a drum.
Clinical significance
The Leather pulse indicates severe deficiency of Blood, Essence or
Yin. It also indicates Qi floating upwards because it is not rooted
by Blood.
Common patterns presenting with a Leather pulse include
depletion of Blood or Yin, or both, and these may appear in
habitual miscarriage, menorrhagia and nocturnal emissions. In my
experience, the Leather pulse is frequently felt in advanced cases
of multiple sclerosis.
Box 50.20
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Leather
pulse.
 
BOX 50.20
 
   
 
LEATHER: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Blood
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Essence
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Yin
• 
 
Qi floating upwards
1156
Combinations
Leather-Rapid
This indicates severe deficiency of Yin with Empty-Heat.
Leather-Slow
This indicates severe Blood deficiency with Blood stasis.
Leather-Choppy
This denotes severe Blood deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Choppy
The Choppy pulse is rough, jagged and lacks a wave but is not felt
clearly at the superficial level. The Leather pulse, which like the
Choppy pulse also indicates Blood deficiency, feels relatively hard
at the superficial level; at the deep level, it is more empty than the
Choppy pulse.
Hollow
The Hollow pulse is empty in the middle and can be felt clearly at
the superficial and deep levels, whereas the Leather pulse cannot
be felt at the deep level. Another difference is that the Leather
pulse feels relatively hard and stretched at the superficial level,
which the Hollow pulse does not.
Floating-Empty
The Floating-Empty pulse and the Hollow pulse share the common
characteristic of being empty at the deep level. However, the
Floating-Empty pulse is relatively soft at the superficial level, or at
least much softer than the Leather pulse, which feels hard and
stretched at the superficial level.
Wiry
The Leather pulse has a slightly Wiry quality on the surface but it
disappears on pressure, whereas the Wiry pulse is Wiry at all levels
and does not disappear on pressure. The Leather pulse, although
1157
hard on the superficial level like the Wiry pulse, feels more ‘flat’ on
the superficial level than the Wiry pulse.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
Hidden
Pulse description
The Hidden pulse is simply an extreme case of a Deep pulse: it is
deeper than the Deep pulse and can be felt only with a very strong
pressure at a very deep level near the bone.
Clinical significance
The clinical significance of the Hidden pulse is similar to that of
the Deep pulse: it simply means that the condition is an interior
one and its clinical significance depends on its association with
other qualities, especially the Full or Empty ones.
However, the Hidden quality always indicates a ‘blockage’ in the
Interior, especially when it is of the full type; ‘blockage’ in this case
means that a pathogenic factor is lodged deep in the interior of the
body. It is ‘locked’ inside and it is difficult to expel. For example,
depending on its association with other qualities, the Hidden
pulse could indicate ‘blocked’ stagnation of Qi, ‘blocked’ Blood
stasis, ‘blocked’ Heat in the Interior, ‘blocked’ Cold, ‘blocked’
chronic pain, ‘blocked’ Phlegm and ‘blocked’ retention of food.
The most important distinction to make is whether the Hidden
pulse is of the full or empty type.
When the Hidden pulse is also of the empty type, it indicates
severe Yang deficiency.
 
The Hidden pulse often indicates that a pathogenic
factor is ‘blocked’ deep inside the body. Examples of
such pathogenic factors are Qi stagnation, Blood stasis,
Heat, Cold, Phlegm or retention of food.
1158
Common conditions presenting with a Hidden pulse include
digestive diseases, Blood stasis, abdominal masses, heart disease
and vomiting.
According to Dr Shen, the Hidden pulse in apparently healthy
people indicates a lifestyle of overindulging in drugs and sexual
activity. He pinpoints the age to which this lifestyle refers
according to the degree of the Hidden pulse: if the pulse is very
Hidden it indicates that that lifestyle occurred between 10 and 15;
if slightly less Hidden, between 15 and 20; if even less Hidden,
over 20.
 
According to Dr Shen, the Hidden pulse in a seemingly
healthy person may indicate overindulgence in drugs
and excessive sexual activity in the past.
Box 50.21
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Hidden pulse.
 
BOX 50.21
 
   
 
HIDDEN PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
• 
 
Pathogenic factor (blockage) in the Interior (Hidden-
Full)
• 
 
Severe Yang deficiency (Hidden-Weak)
Combinations
Hidden-Full
This indicates Qi and Blood stagnation, retention of food or
internal Cold or internal Heat according to whether the pulse is
Slow or Rapid.
Hidden-Empty
This indicates severe Yang deficiency with internal Cold.
Hidden-Rapid
This indicates interior Heat, which may be Full- or Empty-Heat
1159
according to whether the pulse is full or empty.
Hidden-Slow
This indicates interior Cold.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Deep
The Deep and Hidden pulses are not significantly different
because the Hidden pulse is simply an extreme case of Deep pulse.
Short
The Hidden pulse is very deep and difficult to feel but it occupies
its normal pulse position, whereas the Short pulse does not fill its
pulse position.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This is seen in retention of food in the chest, stagnation of Qi,
retching, and an uncomfortable sensation in the heart region.
Middle position
This is seen in abdominal pain, feeling of heaviness of the body,
and weakness.
Rear position
This is seen in severe hernia pain.
Scattered
Pulse description
The Scattered pulse feels as if it were ‘broken’ into many tiny dots
instead of flowing smoothly. It is relatively superficial but it
disappears easily with pressure.
Clinical significance
1160
The Scattered pulse indicates a severe and advanced stage of Qi
and Blood deficiency and particularly of Kidney-Qi and of the
Original Qi; it is a pulse that always indicates a serious condition.
In pregnancy, the Scattered pulse indicates the likelihood of an
imminent miscarriage, while before delivery it indicates that the
labour may be long and difficult. After childbirth it indicates
severe depletion of Blood and the woman should be treated, even
in the absence of symptoms, to prevent collapse of Blood.
Common conditions presenting with a Scattered pulse include
heart disease, digestive disorders, miscarriage, and asthma.
Box 50.22
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Scattered
pulse.
 
BOX 50.22
 
   
 
SCATTERED PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Severe Qi-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Severe Kidney-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Original Qi
Combinations
Scattered-Slow
This indicates severe Qi and Yang deficiency
Scattered-Rapid
This denotes severe Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Scattered-Floating
This indicates severe deficiency of the Original Qi with floating of
Yang or with Yin Fire.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Empty
The Empty pulse and the Scattered pulse share the characteristic
1161
of being relatively superficial and of disappearing when more
pressure is applied. The Empty pulse has more shape and flows
more smoothly than the Scattered pulse; although obviously
empty, the Empty pulse has much more ‘body’ than the Scattered
pulse. In addition the Scattered pulse, unlike the Empty pulse,
feels as if it were broken into tiny dots.
Choppy
The Choppy pulse and the Scattered pulse share the characteristic
of feeling ‘rough’ and not flowing smoothly. However, the Choppy
pulse has more shape than the Scattered pulse.
Fine
The Fine pulse is simply thinner than normal but it can be felt
clearly and flows relatively smoothly, whereas the Scattered pulse
does not flow smoothly and has no clear shape.
Minute
The Minute pulse is extremely thin but can be felt clearly and
flows relatively smoothly, whereas the Scattered pulse does not
flow smoothly and has no clear shape.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
In the left Front it denotes anxiety and palpitations; in the right
Front it is found in sweating.
Middle position
In the left Middle it denotes Phlegm-Fluids in the limbs, and in the
right Middle twitching of legs and oedema.
Rear position
This denotes decline of Original Qi.
FULL-TYPE PULSES
1162
Wiry
Pulse description
The Wiry pulse feels superficial and hard: it can be felt very clearly
at every level. At the superficial level it ‘hits’ the finger with its
force. It is often compared with the taut string of a musical
instrument and if we try to push it down, it ‘springs’ back up. This
is a common pulse in clinical practice and one that is relatively
easy to distinguish; because it is superficial, hard and springy, it
manifests itself easily without the practitioner having to
concentrate on interpreting it.
Clinical significance
The Wiry pulse is extremely common. The chief clinical
significance of the Wiry pulse is that it indicates any of the Full
type of Liver disharmonies (e.g. Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood
stasis, Liver-Yang rising, Liver-Fire, Liver-Wind).
A Wiry pulse may also indicate the presence of chronic Phlegm
and it is usually seen in old people. Finally the Wiry pulse may also
indicate chronic pain, even if that pain does not derive from a
Liver disharmony; for example, if a patient has been suffering
from chronic sciatica on the Bladder channel, the left Rear pulse
position may become Wiry.
 
The Wiry pulse does not denote Liver disharmonies
only: it may also indicate long-standing retention of
Phlegm.
The Wiry pulse is of the full type by definition but it may be
seen in Empty conditions as well combining with empty-type pulse
qualities; for example, a relatively common clinical finding is that
of a pulse that is Fine in general but also Wiry on the left in a
patient suffering from Blood deficiency and Liver-Yang rising. A
Wiry but relatively Weak pulse, or a pulse that is Wiry on the left
and Weak on the right, indicates Stomach and Spleen deficiency
with stagnation of Cold or rebellious Liver-Qi invading the
1163
Stomach; such patterns manifest with sour regurgitation, nausea,
vomiting, epigastric pain, hiccup and belching.
It is normal for the pulse to be relatively Wiry in spring. The
‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 19
 
says: ‘
 
Spring is the season of the
Liver, it pertains to East and Wood. Everything grows during this
season; when the Qi of the Spring arrives the pulse should be
relatively soft, weak, light, slippery and long, all of which explain
why it is called Wiry. The opposite of this indicates disease.’
 
8
Common conditions that present with a Wiry pulse are
menstrual pain, premenstrual tension, depression, anxiety, chronic
Phlegm, chronic pain and mental illness.
Box 50.23
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Wiry pulse.
 
BOX 50.23
 
   
 
WIRY PULSE: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
• 
 
Liver disharmony (Full type)
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Chronic pain
Combinations
Wiry-Rapid
This indicates Liver-Fire.
Wiry-Slow
This indicates stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel or rebellious
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach.
Wiry-Slippery
This indicates the simultaneous presence of a Full Liver pattern
and Phlegm: this is a relatively common pulse combination.
Wiry-Long
This indicates stagnation of Liver-Qi or stasis of Liver-Blood.
Wiry-Deep
1164
This indicates chronic Phlegm.
Wiry-Fine
This indicates a Full Liver pattern (often Liver-Yang or Liver-Wind)
occurring against a background of Blood deficiency.
Wiry-Tight
This indicates Blood stasis.
Wiry-Big
This indicates Liver-Fire or Liver-Yang rising.
Wiry-Overflowing
This denotes Liver-Fire.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Tight
The Tight pulse and the Wiry pulse share the common
characteristic of feeling hard under pressure and being ‘springy’.
The two main differences are that the Tight pulse is thicker than
the Wiry pulse and feels like a rope rather than the string of a
musical instrument, and that the Wiry pulse is more superficial
than the Tight pulse and it hits the finger more forcefully.
Firm
The Firm pulse can be felt only at the middle and deep levels and
feels hard. The Wiry pulse also feels hard but it is more springy
and can be felt clearly at the superficial level as well. In other
words, the Firm pulse is a pulse that is Wiry but only at the middle
and deep levels.
Leather
The Leather pulse has a slightly Wiry quality on the surface but it
disappears on pressure, whereas the Wiry pulse is Wiry at all levels
and does not disappear on pressure. The Leather pulse, although
hard on the superficial level like the Wiry pulse, feels more ‘flat’ on
the superficial level than the Wiry pulse.
1165
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
This occurs in headaches, Phlegm in chest and diaphragm.
Middle position
In the left Middle it is seen in alternation of chills and fever, and
abdominal masses; in the right Middle it denotes Cold in Stomach
and Spleen, and chest and abdominal pain.
Rear position
This denotes hernia pain and stiffness of the legs.
Tight
Pulse description
The Tight pulse is hard and feels like a rope being twisted; it is
strong and has a springy feeling when the pressure is released,
although not as springy as the Wiry pulse.
Clinical significance
In general the Tight pulse indicates Cold and can be found in
many different conditions.
In external invasions of Wind, the Floating-Tight pulse indicates
the invasion of Wind-Cold with the prevalence of Cold (Greater-
Yang pattern — prevalence of Cold within the identification of
patterns according to the Six Stages).
In internal conditions a Tight pulse indicates Cold and usually
Full-Cold, although it can be combined with an empty type of
pulse quality in conditions of Empty-Cold.
Like the Wiry pulse it may indicate chronic pain, usually from
Cold. The Tight pulse is also frequently seen in asthma when this
condition is associated with Cold in the Lungs.
The Tight pulse is also frequently seen in digestive disorders
characterized by the presence of Cold or retention of food in the
Stomach and Spleen, or both, with nausea, vomiting and
diarrhoea.
The Tight pulse is frequently combined with a Slippery pulse in
1166
the presence of Cold-Phlegm.
The Tight pulse may also indicate Cold in the Blood.
Common conditions presenting with a Tight pulse include
chronic pain, digestive disorders, invasion of Cold, menstrual pain,
diarrhoea from Cold, asthma and arteriosclerosis.
Box 50.24
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Tight pulse.
 
BOX 50.24
 
   
 
TIGHT PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
• 
 
Internal Cold
• 
 
Invasion of external Wind-Cold
• 
 
Chronic pain
• 
 
Cold in the Blood
Combinations
Tight-Floating
This indicates invasion of Wind-Cold with the prevalence of Cold.
Tight-Deep
This indicates internal Full-Cold.
Tight-Full
This indicates chronic pain from Cold.
Tight-Fine
This denotes Empty-Cold occurring against a background of
Stomach and Spleen deficiency.
Tight-Overflowing
This indicates ulcers or carbuncles.
Tight-Choppy
This is seen in chronic Painful Obstruction Syndrome from Cold.
Tight-Slippery
1167
This denotes Cold Phlegm and is common in asthma.
Tight-Firm
This indicates Blood stasis from Cold.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Wiry
The Tight pulse and the Wiry pulse share the common
characteristic of feeling hard pressure and being ‘springy’. The two
main differences are that the Tight pulse is thicker than the Wiry
pulse and feels like a rope rather than the string of a musical
instrument, and that the Wiry pulse is more superficial than the
Tight pulse and it hits the finger more forcefully.
Firm
The Firm pulse is Full, Wiry and can be felt only at the middle and
deep level. The Tight pulse can be felt at all levels. The Tight pulse
feels more ‘knotted’ (like a rope) than the Firm pulse.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
There is a difference between left and right Front positions (Li Shi
Zhen does not expand on this).
Middle position
This is seen in severe chest and abdominal pain.
Rear position
This denotes syndrome from excess Cold, Running Piglet
syndrome, or hernia pain.
Overflowing
Pulse description
The Overflowing pulse feels large under the finger, very superficial
and broad; as its name implies, it is often described as feeling like
1168
a river flooding its banks because the pulse goes beyond its
natural boundary in all directions.
Clinical significance
The Overflowing pulse indicates Heat and it is nearly always rapid
as well. Although the Overflowing pulse is full by definition, to
interpret its clinical significance we need to distinguish an
Overflowing pulse with strength from one without strength.
Although, according to the theory, an Overflowing pulse
indicates Heat by definition, there are situations where it may be
due to other causes, especially when it is found in only one
position, and some of these are described below. For example, an
Overflowing quality on the Heart pulse may indicate emotional
problems, not necessarily manifesting with Heat. Therefore, when
we feel an Overflowing pulse, it is important to check this against
the tongue and the inside of the lower eyelids: in true conditions
of Heat, the tongue will be Red and the inside of the lower eyelids
will also be red.
Overflowing with strength
The Overflowing pulse with strength always indicates Full-Heat,
which may affect the Liver, Heart, Lungs or Stomach; in this case it
is also rapid.
In the course of an acute febrile disease, the Overflowing pulse
with strength is seen with Heat in the Stomach at the Qi level. In
this case the Overflowing quality indicates that the Heat is
Overflowing from the main channels into the Connecting
channels; in such a case, if the pulse is very Overflowing and very
rapid this indicates that the Heat is close to progressing to the
Nutritive-Qi or Blood level and the possible development of
macules. Thus, in the course of an acute febrile disease, an
Overflowing quality often indicates that the condition is changing
and progressing to the next level.
The Overflowing pulse quality is frequently felt in individual
positions only and in such cases it usually indicates Heat in that
particular organ. However, its clinical significance in such cases
may be slightly different, often indicating severe emotional
problems. For example, if the pulse is Overflowing only on the
1169
Heart position, this definitely indicates that the patient is suffering
from severe emotional problems affecting the Heart. If the pulse is
Overflowing only on the Liver position, it indicates that the person
is suffering from repressed anger, resentment or frustration. If it is
Overflowing on the Lung position it indicates that the patient is
suffering from long-term unexpressed sadness and grief.
It is important to stress that, when the pulse is Overflowing only
in one position, it may be ‘Overflowing’ only in relation to the
other positions. For example, the pulse may be Weak in general
and quite difficult to feel but the pulse of the Heart position
stands out as being more superficial and larger than the others: we
would therefore interpret this Heart pulse as being ‘Overflowing’
but it would not be as Overflowing as the classic Overflowing
pulse.
 
The Overflowing pulse on individual positions
indicates either Heat in that particular organ (tongue
Red and pulse Rapid) or severe emotional problems
related to that particular organ (Heart, Liver, Lungs).
Overflowing without strength
The Overflowing pulse without strength feels large, superficial and
flooding but it disappears when more pressure is applied and it
has no strength at the deep level. Its strength indicates Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat and exhaustion of Body Fluids. In this
respect, its clinical significance is the same as the Floating-Empty
pulse but it indicates a more severe stage of it and more intense
Empty-Heat.
The pulse may also be Overflowing without strength and
Floating, which indicates a condition of severe Yin deficiency,
intense Empty-Heat and Qi rising to the top.
According to Dr Shen, an Overflowing-Hollow pulse is
frequently seen in hypertension and diabetes; in the former
condition, the pulse is Overflowing and Hollow more in the Front
and Middle positions, whereas in the latter more so in the Middle
and Rear positions.
Common conditions that present with an Overflowing pulse
1170
include mental illness, febrile diseases and severe emotional
problems.
Box 50.25
 
summarizes the clinical significance of an Overflowing
pulse.
 
BOX 50.25
 
   
 
OVERFLOWING PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Full-Heat (Overflowing with strength)
• 
 
Stomach-Heat pattern at Qi Level
• 
 
Heat in a particular organ
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and exhaustion of
Body Fluids (Overflowing without strength)
Combinations
Overflowing-Floating
This indicates invasion of Wind-Heat with intense Heat; this
condition would progress very rapidly to the Qi level.
Overflowing-Floating without strength
This denotes severe Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat.
Overflowing-Deep
This indicates internal Heat.
Overflowing-Slippery
This indicates Phlegm-Heat with prevalence of Heat.
Overflowing-Soft
This indicates Yin deficiency with exhaustion of Body Fluids and
Empty-Heat.
Overflowing-Tight
This indicates Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome or blood in the
stools with constipation.
1171
Overflowing-Hollow-Rapid with strength
This indicates imminent bleeding.
Overflowing-Hollow-Weak
This indicates a previous haemorrhage.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Big
The Big pulse is very similar to the Overflowing pulse in so far as
they are both superficial, large and beyond the pulse boundary.
The Big pulse, however, is ‘rounder’ than the Overflowing pulse,
has more shape and is not necessarily rapid.
Full
The Full pulse simply indicates that the pulse is full and relatively
hard, whereas the Overflowing pulse is larger than its boundary,
more superficial and relatively softer.
Long
The Long pulse extends beyond the pulse positions lengthwise
and is not superficial. The Overflowing pulse extends beyond the
pulse positions in all directions and is superficial.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Front position
In the left Front this denotes Heart-Fire blazing upwards; in the
right Front it is found in a feeling of heaviness in the chest.
Middle position
This indicates Liver-Yang rising, or Stomach and Spleen deficiency.
Rear position
This denotes exhaustion of Kidney-Essence, or deficiency of Yin
with blazing Fire.
1172
Big
Pulse description
The Big pulse is large, broad, Overflowing from its boundary and
full. It is very similar to the Overflowing pulse but it has more
shape and is not necessarily rapid.
Clinical significance
The Big pulse generally indicates Heat and its clinical significance
is similar to that of the Overflowing pulse. When we feel a Big
pulse, it is important to check this against the tongue and the
inside of the lower eyelids: in true conditions of Heat, the tongue
will be Red and the inside of the lower eyelids will also be red. We
need to differentiate the Big pulse with strength from the Big
pulse without strength.
Big with strength
The Big pulse with strength indicates internal Heat which may
occur in the Heart, Liver, Lungs or Stomach. In acute febrile
diseases, it indicates Heat in the Stomach at the Qi level.
Common patterns presenting with a Big pulse with strength are
acute febrile diseases at the Qi level, Liver- 
Fire, Heart-Fire, Heat in
the Intestines and Phlegm-Fire and these appear in conditions
such as acute chest infections, intestinal infections or heart
disease.
Big without strength
The Big pulse without strength indicates Yin deficiency with
Empty-Heat or severe depletion of Blood. The ‘Simple Questions’
in 
Chapter 17
 
says: ‘
 
The Big pulse indicates deficiency of Yin and
excess of Yang with Empty-Heat.’
 
9
Common patterns presenting with a Big pulse without strength
are severe Blood deficiency, Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and
Blood deficiency with Liver-Yang rising. This pulse frequently
appears in menstrual disorders and diabetes.
Box 50.26
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Big pulse.
 
BOX 50.26
 
   
 
BIG PULSE: SUMMARY OF
1173
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
• 
 
Full-Heat (Big with strength)
• 
 
Heat in the Stomach at Qi level (febrile disease)
• 
 
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat (Big without
strength)
Combinations
Big-Deep
This indicates internal Heat.
Big-Wiry
This indicates Liver-Fire.
Big-Soggy
This denotes Empty-Heat with Dampness.
Big-Overflowing
This indicates Stomach-Heat.
Big-Full
This indicates severe Qi stagnation.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Overflowing
The Big pulse is very similar to the Overflowing pulse in so far as
they are both superficial, large and going beyond the pulse
boundary. The Big pulse, however, is ‘rounder’ than the
Overflowing pulse, has more shape and is not necessarily rapid.
Full
The Full pulse simply indicates that the pulse is full and relatively
hard, whereas the Big pulse is larger than its boundary, more
superficial and relatively softer.
1174
Long
The Long pulse extends beyond the pulse positions lengthwise
and is not superficial. The Big pulse extends beyond the pulse
positions in all directions and is superficial.
Clinical significance in each position
This is the same as for the Overflowing pulse.
Firm
Pulse description
The Firm pulse is felt only at the deep level; it feels hard and it
combines the qualities of Full, Wiry and Long. It is basically a
pulse that is Wiry only at the middle and deep levels (the Wiry
pulse can be felt clearly at all levels).
Clinical significance
The Firm pulse generally indicates internal Cold often causing
chronic pain. It may also indicate accumulation in the Interior,
stagnation of Qi or stasis of Blood. It is a pulse quality that is
associated with abdominal masses or abdominal pain and it may
also indicate Blood stasis deriving from Cold.
A pulse that is Firm on all three positions of the right or on both
Middle positions of left and right indicates a pathology of the
Penetrating Vessel.
The Firm pulse quality is relatively common.
Common conditions presenting with a Firm pulse include Chest
Painful Obstruction Syndrome, convulsions, abdominal masses,
abdominal pain, menstrual diseases, and arteriosclerosis.
Box 50.27
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Firm pulse.
 
BOX 50.27
 
   
 
FIRM PULSE: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Internal Cold
• 
 
Accumulation in the Interior
• 
 
Stagnation of Qi
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
Stagnation in the Penetrating Vessel
1175
Combinations
Firm-Tight
This indicates internal Cold possibly with oedema.
Firm-Slow
This indicates internal Cold and Blood stasis.
Firm-Choppy
This denotes Blood stasis.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Wiry
The Wiry pulse and the Firm pulse share similar characteristics of
being hard, full and long. The main difference is that the Wiry
pulse is felt clearly at all levels, whereas the Firm pulse is felt only
at the middle and deep levels.
Tight
The Tight pulse and the Firm pulse share similar characteristics of
being hard and full. The main difference is that the Tight pulse is
felt clearly at all 
levels, whereas the Firm pulse is felt only at the
middle and deep levels.
Full
The Full pulse can be felt at all levels, whereas the Firm pulse can
be felt only at the deep level.
Hidden
The Hidden pulse is sunken beneath the muscles near the bone
and is very difficult to feel, whereas the Firm pulse can be felt
clearly at the middle and deep levels.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
1176
Long
Pulse description
The Long pulse is simply longer than normal, that is, it extends
lengthwise beyond the pulse boundary. In order to judge whether
a pulse is Long, normal or Short, it is important to roll the finger
back and forth (distally and proximally) on each position.
Clinical significance
The Long pulse usually indicates Heat. It may also indicate a Liver
disharmony of the Full type with rebellious Qi (e.g. Liver-Yang
rising or rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel).
The Long pulse may also indicate Phlegm. The ‘Simple
Questions’ in 
Chapter 18
 
says: ‘
 
If the Liver pulse is relatively soft
and feels like the tip of a long bamboo pole, it indicates a
harmonious state of the Liver … If the Liver pulse is Full and
Slippery and feels like moving along a long bamboo pole, it indicates
Liver disease.’
 
10
If the pulse is Long, relatively soft, Slowed-down, neither
Floating nor Deep, neither Rapid nor Slow, neither Full nor Empty,
it is a sign of health.
Common conditions that present with a Long pulse are Liver
disease, hypochondrial pain, mental illness, rebellious Qi in the
Penetrating vessel and haemoptysis.
According to Dr Shen, if the pulse is Long on one side and Short
on the other, it indicates a serious problem. Usually the side
displaying the Long quality is also Wiry, Fine and Rapid. For
example, if the left-side pulse is Long-Wiry-Fine-Rapid and the
right-side Short, this indicates that the person is extremely
nervous and suffers from a Liver and Heart disharmony. If the
right-side pulse is Long, Weak on the Lung position, Fine-Tight on
the Middle and Rear positions and Short on the left side, it
indicates a Stomach disharmony and general deficiency of Qi.
Box 50.28
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Long pulse.
 
BOX 50.28
 
   
 
LONG PULSE: SUMMARY
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Heat
1177
• 
 
Liver disharmony (Full type)
• 
 
Phlegm
• 
 
Health (relatively soft, Slowed-down, neither Floating
nor Deep, neither Rapid nor Slow, neither Full nor
Empty)
Combinations
Long-Rapid
This indicates internal Heat.
Long-Slow
This indicates stagnation of Qi.
Long-Floating
This indicates invasion of external Wind-Heat.
Long-Deep
This indicates internal Heat.
Long-Wiry
This indicates a Liver disharmony of the Full type.
Long-Slippery
This indicates Phlegm-Heat.
Long-Overflowing
This indicates excess of Yang and Heat.
Long-Firm
This indicates internal accumulation.
Long-Overflowing-Hollow
This may indicate hypertension or diabetes, according to Dr Shen.
1178
Differentiation of similar pulses
Overflowing
The Long pulse extends beyond the pulse positions lengthwise
and is not superficial. The Overflowing pulse extends beyond the
pulse positions in all directions and is superficial.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
Moving
Pulse description
The Moving pulse is short, Slippery, rapid and it gives the
impression of ‘shaking’ or ‘vibrating’ instead of pulsating. It is
shaped like a bean without head or tail. The Moving pulse is felt
more frequently on the Front and Middle positions.
Clinical significance
The Moving pulse generally reflects severe emotional problems
and particularly shock, fright or severe anxiety. In cases of shock,
the pulse can remain Moving for years afterwards.
The Moving pulse may also indicate severe deficiency of Qi and
Blood, often manifesting with cramps in the legs. The Moving
pulse with strength may also indicate Qi stagnation.
Box 50.29
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Moving pulse.
 
BOX 50.29
 
   
 
MOVING PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Shock
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood
• 
 
Qi stagnation
Combinations
1179
Moving-Rapid
This indicates Heat occurring against a background of severe
emotional problems.
Moving-Slippery
This indicates severe deficiency of Qi and Phlegm.
Moving-Full
This indicates chronic pain.
Moving-Empty
This indicates severe depletion of Blood.
Moving-Weak
This indicates shock.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Short:
The Moving pulse is short by definition but in addition it is also
rapid, shaped like a bean, somewhat Slippery and giving the
impression of ‘shaking’ rather than pulsating.
Slippery
The Moving pulse is Slippery by definition but in addition it is also
Short, rapid, shaped like a bean, somewhat Slippery and giving the
impression of ‘shaking’ rather than pulsating.
Clinical significance in each position (Li Shi Zhen)
Not given by Li Shi Zhen.
PULSES WITH IRREGULARITIES OF
RATE OR RHYTHM
Knotted
1180
Pulse description
The Knotted pulse quality refers to the rhythm of the pulse: it
denotes a pulse that is Slow and that stops at irregular intervals.
Clinical significance
The Knotted pulse indicates internal Cold with stagnation of Qi
and Blood and it always indicates a Heart disharmony (although,
of course, the rate and rhythm of the pulse are the same in all
positions). It is frequently seen in heart disease, such as coronary
heart disease, angina pectoris, rheumatic heart disease, etc. A
Knotted pulse can also come on after surgery. In young people, a
Knotted pulse may indicate a constitutional deficiency of the
Original Qi or a severe deficiency of Yang due to excessive physical
work or excessive sexual activity during puberty.
We need to differentiate between the Knotted pulse with
strength and the Knotted pulse without strength.
Knotted with strength
The Knotted pulse with strength may indicate several conditions
as follows:
 
• 
 
severe Qi stagnation from Cold
• 
 
chronic Phlegm stagnating in the Interior in old
people
• 
 
retention of food
• 
 
severe Qi stagnation from emotional problems
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
abdominal masses.
Knotted without strength
The Knotted pulse without strength may indicate a constitutional
deficiency of the Original Qi, a deficiency of Kidney-Essence,
possibly from excessive sexual activity, or a severe deficiency of
Yang.
Common conditions presenting with a Knotted pulse include
heart disease, coronary heart disease, angina pectoris and
1181
rheumatic heart disease.
Box 50.30
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Knotted
pulse.
 
BOX 50.30
 
   
 
KNOTTED PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Severe Qi stagnation from Cold
• 
 
Chronic Phlegm stagnating in the Interior (old
people)
• 
 
Retention of food
• 
 
Severe Qi stagnation from emotional problems
• 
 
Blood stasis
• 
 
deficiency of Original Qi (without strength)
• 
 
deficiency of Kidney-Essence (without strength)
• 
 
Severe deficiency of Yang
• 
 
Heart disease
Combinations
Knotted-Choppy
This indicates Blood stasis and may point to coronary heart
disease.
Knotted-Slippery
This indicates chronic retention of Phlegm and may point to
rheumatic heart disease.
Knotted-Floating
This indicates invasion of Cold in the Channels.
Knotted-Deep
This indicates accumulation in the Interior.
Knotted-Wiry
This indicates a disease of the arteries or hypertension.
1182
Differentiation of similar pulses
Intermittent
The Intermittent pulse stops at 
regular
 
intervals and may be rapid,
slow or of normal rate, whereas the Knotted pulse is always slow
and stops at 
irregular
 
intervals.
Slow
The Slow pulse and the Knotted pulse are both slow but the
Knotted pulse stops at irregular intervals.
Clinical significance in each position
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
Hasty
Pulse description
The Hasty pulse quality refers to the rhythm of the pulse: it
denotes a pulse that is Rapid and stops at irregular intervals.
Clinical significance
The Hasty pulse indicates internal Heat and it is always related to a
Heart disharmony (although, of course, the rate and rhythm of the
pulse are the same in all positions). The Hasty pulse may also
indicate retention of food or Phlegm occurring against a
background of internal Heat, or stagnation of Qi or Blood.
The Hasty pulse without strength indicates severe depletion of
the Original Qi and a separation of Yin and Yang; this always
indicates a serious condition, more so than the Knotted pulse
without strength.
The Hasty pulse may also indicate rebellious Qi from anger.
Common conditions which present with a Hasty pulse are
mental illness, chronic bronchitis with Phlegm-Heat and heart
disease.
Box 50.31
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Hasty pulse.
 
BOX 50.31
 
   
 
HASTY PULSE: SUMMARY
1183
OF CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Heat
• 
 
Retention of food with Heat
• 
 
Phlegm with Heat
• 
 
Severe stagnation of Qi and Blood
• 
 
Severe depletion of Original Qi (without strength)
• 
 
Separation of Yin and Yang
• 
 
Rebellious Qi from anger
Combinations
Hasty-Overflowing
This indicates Heat in the Stomach.
Hasty-Slippery
This indicates long-standing retention of Phlegm-Heat.
Hasty-Wiry
This indicates Liver-Fire and Heart-Fire.
Hasty-Slippery-Wiry
This indicates Heart-Fire, Liver-Fire and Phlegm-Heat.
Hasty-Floating
This indicates Heat in the Bright Yang.
Hasty-Fine without strength
This indicates collapse of Heart-Qi.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Intermittent
The Intermittent pulse stops at regular intervals and may be rapid,
slow or of normal rate, whereas the Hasty pulse is always rapid
and stops at irregular intervals.
1184
Rapid
The Rapid pulse and the Hasty pulse are both rapid but, whereas
the Rapid pulse is regular, the Hasty pulse stops at irregular
intervals.
Clinical significance in each position
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
Hurried
Pulse description
The Hurried pulse is rapid by definition, beating at least eight
times for each breath cycle, and it gives the impression of being
hurried, anxious, agitated and urgent.
Clinical significance
The Hurried pulse generally indicates severe deficiency of Yin with
intense Empty-Heat; it always indicates a serious condition.
The Chinese name for this pulse quality, 
Ji
 
, is the same as in 
Li Ji
, that is, the symptomatology of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating
Vessel. Literally, 
Ji
 
means 
‘urgency’ and in the context of this
pathology, 
Li Ji
 
indicates a feeling of energy rising from the
abdomen to the throat, accompanied by a feeling of restlessness
and anxiety. In severe cases of this pathology, the pulse could be
Hurried.
Box 50.32
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Hurried
pulse.
 
BOX 50.32
 
   
 
HURRIED PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
deficiency of Yin with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Severe rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel
1185
Combinations
Hurried-Floating
This indicates severe Empty-Heat arising from Yin deficiency.
Hurried-Deep
This indicates a condition of rebellious Qi in the Penetrating
Vessel.
Hurried-Floating-Empty
This denotes severe Yin deficiency.
Hurried-Slippery
This indicates Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency with Phlegm.
Hurried-Overflowing
This indicates severe Empty-Heat arising from Yin deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Hasty
The Hasty pulse is Rapid and stops at irregular intervals. The
Hurried pulse is more rapid than the Rapid pulse and it gives the
impression of being agitated and urgent.
Rapid
The Hurried pulse is a form of the Rapid pulse. It differs from it in
so far as it is more rapid and it conveys the impression of being
extremely agitated, urgent and hurried.
Clinical significance in each position
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
Intermittent
Pulse description
1186
The Intermittent pulse stops at regular intervals: it may be slow,
rapid or of normal rate. After stopping, it gives the impression of
taking a long time to start again. In order to establish whether or
not a pulse is Intermittent, it is important to count the beats for a
long time because it may stop only once in every 50 beats.
Clinical significance
The Intermittent pulse indicates always a Heart disharmony but
also the severe depletion of other Yin organs. The ‘Simple
Questions’ in 
Chapter 17
 
says: ‘
 
The Intermittent pulse indicates
depletion of Qi.’
 
11
 
The Intermittent pulse is seen most frequently
in severe deficiency of Heart-Qi and Spleen-Qi.
The shorter the interval at which it stops, the greater the number
of Yin organs are diseased. According to 
Chapter 5
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’, if the pulse halts every 50 beats, one Yin organ is diseased; if
it halts every 40 beats, two Yin organs are diseased; if it halts every
30 beats, three Yin organs are diseased; if it halts every 20 beats,
four Yin organs are diseased; and if it halts every 10 beats, all the
Yin organs are diseased.
 
12
 
If the pulse stops regularly after less
than 4 beats, this indicates a serious condition.
The Intermittent pulse may also indicate shock. Strangely, old
Chinese books say that an Intermittent pulse at around a hundred
days of pregnancy is normal.
Common conditions which present with an Intermittent pulse
include heart disease, Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome and
some menstrual disorders.
Box 50.33
 
summarizes the clinical significance of an Intermittent
pulse.
 
BOX 50.33
 
   
 
INTERMITTENT PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Heart disharmony
• 
 
Shock
• 
 
Disease in Yin organs
1187
Combinations
Intermittent-Slow
This indicates exhaustion of the Original Qi.
Intermittent-Rapid
This indicates internal Heat occurring against a background of a
Heart disharmony.
Intermittent-Overflowing
This indicates the location of the disease in the Connecting
channels.
Intermittent-Fine-Deep
This denotes severe Spleen-Qi deficiency, possibly with chronic
diarrhoea.
Intermittent-Fine-Minute
This indicates exhaustion of Body Fluids.
Intermittent-Knotted
This indicates heart disease occurring against a background of
Heart-Yang deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Knotted
The Knotted pulse is slow and stops at irregular intervals, whereas
the Intermittent pulse may be slow, rapid or of normal rate and
stops at regular intervals.
Hasty
The Hasty pulse is rapid and stops at irregular intervals, whereas
the Intermittent pulse may be slow, rapid or of normal rate and
stops at regular intervals.
Clinical significance in each position
1188
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
Slowed-Down
Pulse description
The Slowed-Down pulse has four beats per breath cycle: it is
therefore neither rapid nor slow.
Clinical significance
If the patient has no symptoms and the pulse is neither Floating
nor Deep and neither Full nor Empty, the Slowed-Down pulse
indicates health. In fact, the Slowed-Down quality indicates the
presence of Stomach-Qi, which is one of the three attributes of the
normal pulse, as described above.
In pathological conditions, when combined with other pulse
qualities, it usually indicates Dampness occurring against a
background of Stomach and Spleen deficiency.
Common conditions which present with a Slowed-Down pulse
include stroke with Phlegm, Wind Painful Obstruction Syndrome,
vomiting and hiatus hernia.
Box 50.34
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Slowed-Down
pulse.
 
BOX 50.34
 
   
 
SLOWED-DOWN PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Dampness with Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Health (if neither Floating nor Deep and neither Full
nor Empty)
Combinations
Slowed-Down-Soggy
This indicates Dampness with Spleen-Qi deficiency.
1189
Slowed-Down-Slippery
This indicates Cold-Dampness.
Slowed-Down-Fine
This indicates deficiency of Qi and Blood.
Slowed-Down-Floating
This indicates weakness of the Defensive Qi.
Slowed-Down-Deep
This indicates weakness of the Nutritive Qi.
Slowed-Down-Choppy
This indicates Blood deficiency.
Slowed-Down-Big without strength
This indicates Yin deficiency.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Slow
The Slow pulse beats three times or less per breath cycle, while the
Slowed-Down pulse beats four times per breath cycle.
Clinical significance in each position
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
THREE NON-TRADITIONAL PULSE
QUALITIES
Irregular
Pulse description
The Irregular pulse stops at irregular intervals but it is neither
Slow nor Rapid. The traditional pulse qualities of Knotted and
1190
Hasty also describe an irregular pulse but only when it is Slow or
Rapid respectively. In order to decide whether the pulse is
Irregular, it is necessary to feel it for a long time because the pulse
may stop only after many beats. Furthermore, it would be
advisable not to diagnose an Irregular pulse during the first
consultation because the pulse may become Irregular only for a
definite time; this happens when the patient has had a shock or
has suffered emotional stress.
Clinical significance
An Irregular pulse always indicates a Heart disharmony, which
may be deficiency such as Heart-Qi or Heart-Blood deficiency or
Excess such as Heart-Blood stasis. As mentioned above, a pulse
may be Irregular only for a certain time when the patient has
suffered a shock or a deep emotional upset. Conversely, a person
with an Irregular pulse is easily frightened and is prone to suffer
from shock.
A person with an Irregular pulse should not work overlong
hours, should not lift heavy things and should abstain from
excessive sexual activity (especially if male).
Box 50.35
 
summarizes the clinical significance of an Irregular
pulse.
 
BOX 50.35
 
   
 
IRREGULAR PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Heart-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Heart-Blood stasis
• 
 
Shock
 
A person with an Irregular pulse should not work too
long hours, should not do heavy lifting and should
abstain from excessive sexual activity.
1191
Combinations
Irregular-Floating
This indicates severe Heart-Qi deficiency from overwork.
Irregular-Deep
This denotes Heart-Blood stasis.
Irregular-Full
This also denotes Heart-Blood stasis.
Irregular-Empty
This indicates severe Heart-Qi deficiency.
Irregular-Choppy
This indicates severe Heart-Blood deficiency.
Irregular-Slippery
This indicates Heart-Qi deficiency with Phlegm.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Intermittent
The Intermittent pulse stops at regular intervals, whereas the
Irregular pulse stops at irregular intervals.
Knotted
The Knotted pulse is a form of Irregular pulse in so far as it stops
at irregular intervals but it is Slow. Unlike the Knotted pulse, the
Irregular pulse has a normal rate.
Hasty
The Hasty pulse is a form of Irregular pulse in so far as it stops at
irregular intervals but it is Rapid. Unlike the Hasty pulse, the
Irregular pulse has a normal rate.
Clinical significance in each position
1192
This is not applicable as an abnormality in the speed or rate of the
pulse will be the same in all positions.
Stagnant
Pulse description
The Stagnant pulse feels reluctant to come, as if being suppressed,
and seems unlikely to last; it does not flow smoothly and does not
have a ‘wave’.
Clinical significance
The Stagnant pulse nearly always indicates deep emotional
problems, pent-up feelings, resentment and depression. It also
appears when the patient is on certain drugs and especially
tranquillizers.
Box 50.36
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Stagnant
pulse.
 
BOX 50.36
 
   
 
STAGNANT PULSE:
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Deep emotional problems
• 
 
Pent-up feelings
• 
 
Resentment
• 
 
Drugs especially tranquillizers
Combinations
Stagnant-Weak
This indicates severe emotional problems occurring against a
background of Qi and Blood deficiency.
Stagnant-Choppy
This indicates severe emotional problems occurring against a
background of Heart-Blood deficiency; the patient is usually very
1193
depressed.
Stagnant-Full
This indicates pent-up emotions, bottled-up resentment and
depression occurring against a background of Liver-Qi stagnation.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Choppy
The Choppy pulse lacks a ‘wave’ and is weak and empty by
definition. The Stagnant pulse also lacks a ‘wave’ but in addition it
feels reluctant to come and suppressed.
Sad
The Sad pulse, like the Stagnant pulse, lacks a ‘wave’ but it is also
Short, which the Stagnant pulse is not.
Clinical significance in each position
Front position
This denotes Heart- and/or Lung-Qi stagnation from sadness, grief
or depression.
Middle position
This denotes Liver-Qi stagnation from pent-up anger or
resentment, or tranquillizers.
Rear position
This denotes Qi stagnation in the Intestines.
Sad
Pulse description
The Sad pulse does not flow smoothly and lacks a wave and is also
Short and rather weak. It is found either in all positions or, if in
individual positions, only in the 
Front or Middle positions; in other
words, the pulse can never have a Sad quality only on the Rear
position. (See 
Fig. 50.1 on p. 477
 
.)
1194
Clinical significance
The Sad pulse always indicates emotional problems, especially
from sadness and grief; it is a pulse that is frequently seen in
bereaved patients. One can gauge roughly the duration of the
emotional problem according to how many positions are affected.
If the pulse is Sad only on the Front position, the problem is recent
(about 6 months in duration); if it is Sad on the Front and Middle
positions the problem is of about a year’ duration; if it is Sad all
over, this indicates the patient has been sad for a very long time,
possibly the whole life.
If the person suffering from the above emotional problems has a
good constitution, the pulse will display only the Sad quality and
no others; if the person has a weak constitution, emotional
problems will eventually affect one or more organs and this will be
reflected in the relevant pulse positions (e.g. Weak Lung pulse,
Weak Stomach pulse, Wiry Liver pulse, etc.).
Box 50.37
 
summarizes the clinical significance of a Sad pulse.
 
BOX 50.37
 
   
 
SAD PULSE: SUMMARY OF
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
• 
 
Emotional problems from sadness or grief
Combinations
Sad-Full
This indicates emotional problems from grief affecting the Lungs.
Sad-Empty
This indicates emotional problems from sadness affecting
particularly the Heart.
Sad-Rapid
This indicates emotional problems from grief and worry.
Sad-Slow
This indicates emotional problems from deep sadness affecting
1195
the Heart.
Sad-Choppy
This denotes Heart-Blood deficiency deriving from sadness.
Sad-Fine
This denotes Heart-Blood deficiency deriving from sadness.
Differentiation of similar pulses
Choppy
The Choppy pulse, like the Sad pulse, lacks a ‘wave’ but it is also
weak and empty by definition. The Sad pulse is not necessarily
weak or empty and it is also Short.
Clinical significance in each position
Front position
This denotes Heart- or Lung-Qi deficiency, or both, from recent
sadness (about 2 years’ duration).
Middle position
This denotes Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency from long-term
sadness. The pulse cannot have the Sad quality in the Middle
position only so that, in this case, it will have this quality in the
Middle and Front positions.
Rear position
A pulse does not usually have a Sad quality in the Rear position.
CLASSIFICATION OF PULSE
QUALITIES
Pulse qualities can be classified in various ways, each of which
helps to shed more light on their nature.
1196
The Eight Basic Groups Of Pulse Qualities
Floating pulses
Floating — Hollow — Leather — Soggy — Overflowing
Deep pulses
Deep — Hidden — Firm
Slow pulses
Slow — Knotted
Rapid pulses
Rapid — Hasty — Hurried — Overflowing — Moving
Slippery pulses
Slippery — Soggy — Moving
Choppy pulses
Choppy — Scattered
Empty pulses
Empty — Weak — Soggy — Fine — Minute — Scattered — Short
— Choppy
Full pulses
Full — Wiry — Tight — Big — Overflowing — Long
Of course, the same pulse quality may appear in more than one
category according to different aspects, for example Overflowing
appears in the Floating and the Full categories.
The Different Aspects For The Classification
Of Pulse Qualities
It may help us to understand the nature of pulse qualities if we
realize that they reflect different aspects of the pulse; for example,
Slow and Rapid clearly refer to an irregularity of the rate of the
pulse, whereas Knotted, Hasty and Intermittent refer to an
1197
irregularity of the rhythm.
According to depth
Floating — Deep — Hidden — Firm — Leather
According to rate
Slow — Rapid — Slowed-down — Hurried — Moving
According to strength
Empty — Full — Weak — Scattered
According to size
Big — Overflowing — Fine — Minute
According to length
Long — Short — Moving
According to shape
Slippery — Choppy — Wiry — Tight — Moving — Hollow — Firm
According to rhythm
Knotted — Hasty — Intermittent
Of course, some pulse qualities escape such Classification
because they are defined according to more than one aspect. The
following pulse qualities are good examples:
 
• 
 
The Soggy pulse is defined according to depth (it is
floating), size (it is thin) and strength (it is soft).
• 
 
The Leather pulse is defined according to strength (it
is empty at the deep level) and depth (it is relatively
superficial).
• 
 
The Firm pulse is defined according to depth (it is
deep), strength (it is full) and shape (it is wiry).
• 
 
The Scattered pulse is defined according to strength
(it is weak), depth (it is relatively floating) and shape (it
is ‘broken up’).
1198
Classification Of Pulse Qualities According
To Qi, Blood And Body Fluids Patterns
Having discussed the pulse qualities and their clinical significance
one by one, it may be helpful to summarize them by grouping
them according to the main patterns.
Qi deficiency
Empty — Short — Scattered
Yang deficiency
Deep — Weak — Hidden
Blood deficiency
Choppy — Fine — Scattered
Yin deficiency
Fine — Minute — Leather
Qi stagnation
Wiry
Blood stasis
Wiry — Choppy — Slippery — Firm
Phlegm
Slippery — Wiry
Dampness
Soggy — Slippery
Classification Of Pulse Qualities According
To The Eight Principles
Yin—Yang
1199
Yang deficiency
Weak, Slow, Deep
Yin deficiency
Fine, Minute, Floating-Empty, Leather
Collapse of Yang
Hidden, Slow, Scattered
Collapse of Yin
Minute, Rapid
Exterior—Interior
Exterior
Floating
 
• 
 
Cold: Floating-Tight
• 
 
Heat: Floating-Rapid
• 
 
deficient: Floating-Slow-Weak
• 
 
Excess: Floating-Full-Tight
Interior
Deep
 
• 
 
Cold: Deep-Slow
• 
 
Heat: Deep-Rapid
• 
 
deficient: Deep-Weak
• 
 
Excess: Deep-Full
Heat—Cold
Heat
Rapid, Hasty, Hurried, Big, Overflowing
1200
Cold
Slow, Knotted, Tight
Deficiency—Excess
Deficiency
Empty, Weak, Choppy, Fine, Minute, Soggy, Short, Hollow, Leather,
Hidden, Scattered:
 
• 
 
deficiency of Qi: Empty, Soggy
• 
 
deficiency of Yang: Weak, Hidden
• 
 
deficiency of Blood: Choppy, Fine
• 
 
deficiency of Yin: Fine, Minute, Leather, Floating-
Empty
Excess
Full, Slippery, Wiry, Tight, Overflowing, Big, Firm, Long:
 
• 
 
stagnation of Qi: Wiry
• 
 
Blood stasis: Wiry, Choppy, Firm, Slippery
Classification Of Pulse Qualities According
To The Six Stages Patterns
This is illustrated in 
Table 50.2
 
.
1201
Table 50.2
Pulses of the Six Stages Patterns
Classification Of Pulse Qualities According
To The Four Levels Patterns
This is illustrated in 
Table 50.3
Table 50.3
Pulses of the Four Levels Patterns
1202
Classification Of Pulse Qualities According
To The Triple Burner Patterns
This is illustrated in 
Table 50.4
1203
Table 50.4
Pulses of the Triple Burner Patterns
TERMINOLOGY
In order to facilitate cross-reference with other authors, 
Table 50.5
indicates the terminology of pulse qualities used by myself and six
authors.
1204
Table 50.5
Pulse terminology of different authors
a
 
Garry Seifert 1985 ‘Li Shi Zhen Pulse Diagnosis’, published by Garry Seifert,
Haymarket, NSW, Australia.
b
 
Ted Kaptchuk 1983 ‘The Web that has no Weaver’, Congdon and Weed, NY.
c
 
Yang Shou Zhong (translator) 1997 ‘The Pulse Classic’ (
Mai Jing
 
), Blue Poppy Press,
Boulder, CO, USA.
d
 
Cheng Xin Nong 1987 ‘Chinese Acupuncture and Moxibustion’, Foreign Languages
Press, Beijing.
e
 
B. Flaws (translator) 1998 ‘The Lakeside Master’s Study of the Pulse’ by Li Shi Zhen,
Blue Poppy Press, Boulder, CO, USA.
f
 
N. Wiseman and A. Ellis (translators) 1985 ‘Fundamentals of Chinese Medicine’,
Paradigm Publications, Brookline, MA, USA.
1205
THE PULSE POSITIONS IN DETAIL
I shall now discuss the various pulse qualities appearing at each
pulse position and their clinical significance. This information is
derived primarily from Dr J. H. F. Shen and secondarily from my
own experience. As indicated above, Dr Shen places the Large
Intestine on the left and the Small Intestine on the right Rear
position: most other authors reverse this.
Left Front Position (Heart)
The structure of the left Front position is illustrated in 
Figure 50.2
 
.
FIG. 50.2
 
Structure of left Front pulse position
The left Front position corresponds to the Heart and
Pericardium, or to the Heart and Small Intestine in the Five-
Element arrangement of the pulses.
Emotional stress frequently causes abnormal qualities at this
position and I shall discuss the most frequent qualities one by one.
This discussion assumes that a particular pulse position has a
quality that is different from the rest of the pulse. For example, the
discussion of the Overflowing quality on the left Front position
applies if such quality is found only at this position; if all the pulse
positions were Overflowing, the interpretation would of course be
different.
Overflowing
1206
I very frequently encounter an Overflowing quality at this position
when the person is affected by deep emotional problems causing
anxiety and worry; more often than not, these problems are due to
relationship Difficulties. It is important to stress that the pulse
quality may be ‘Overflowing’ at this position only in relation to the
rest of the pulse and, when it is so, it ‘stands out’ and attracts our
attention; thus, if all the other pulse positions are quite weak and
the pulse on the Heart position is much stronger and more
superficial, we may classify this as being ‘Overflowing’ although
the same quality in a person with strong pulses would be normal.
It is essential that a relatively Overflowing quality on this position
when the rest of the positions are very weak is not interpreted as
being normal: when that particular position stands out and is out
of tune with the rest of the pulse, it usually indicates where the
main problem lies.
The Overflowing quality on the Heart position also indicates
that, as a consequence of deep emotional stress, Qi rebels upwards
towards the chest and face and the patient would experience a
feeling of heat in the face, a sense of constriction of the throat and
a feeling of energy rising to the head.
Short
A Short quality on the Heart position also indicates emotional
problems usually deriving from sadness and grief. The Short pulse
lacks a ‘wave’, that is, it does not flow smoothly with a wave-like
movement towards the wrist; Dr Shen calls this pulse ‘Sad pulse’
as it is nearly always due to this emotion. I frequently see this
pulse in people who are sad from being lonely and who crave love
and affection; this pulse is also seen in people who tend to hide
their emotions.
If both Heart and Lung positions feel Short, this can be due to
two causes: either it is due to sadness as above, or to an accident to
the chest. To differentiate these two conditions one must refer to
the other aspects of diagnosis; for example, in a case of sadness,
the eyes might lack spirit (
shen
 
), the tongue might be Red on the
tip or have a Heart crack and the complexion might be pale.
Weak
1207
A Weak position on the Heart pulse often indicates a functional
weakness of the heart and circulation rather than emotional
problems, although the two conditions may of course occur
simultaneously. Thus, a Weak pulse on the left Front position often
indicates Heart-Qi, Heart-Yang or Heart-Blood deficiency and the
patient would suffer from cold hands, tiredness, slight
breathlessness, slight depression and palpitations. If the Heart
position is very Weak while the other pulses are not Weak and
there is a Heart crack on the tongue, these signs indicate a
constitutional weakness of the Heart.
Floating
A pulse that is Floating in one position only is not so floating as
the Floating pulse seen in external invasions of Wind. When the
pulse is Floating only in one position (that is not the Lung
position), it does not indicate an exterior invasion of Wind but a
pathology of that particular organ. In mild invasions of external
Wind, the pulse may be Floating only on the Lung position.
A Floating quality on the Heart pulse often indicates a problem
with the heart itself. For example, a Floating-Hollow quality felt on
the lateral and medial side of the pulse position may indicate high
blood pressure. A Floating-Weak-Hollow quality indicates that 
the
heart is dilated; this occurs often in people who jog for long
distances every day. A Floating-Tight-Hollow quality may indicate
hardening of the arteries.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on the Heart position, especially on its medial
and lateral sides, often indicates heart disease; in such a case, the
pulse on the heart position is often Deep, Fine and Slippery.
Hollow
If the whole pulse is Hollow this of course indicates loss of blood,
but the significance is different if only the Heart position is
Hollow. In such a case, it usually denotes that the heart is
permanently dilated or enlarged, often from excessive jogging. If
the pulse feels Hollow and Overflowing with strength on the distal
1208
or proximal side of the Heart position, this may indicate
arteriosclerosis, stroke or high blood pressure.
Choppy
A Choppy quality on the Heart position indicates Heart-Blood
deficiency often deriving from emotional problems such as
sadness. If both the Heart and Liver positions are Choppy, this
indicates general deficiency of Blood which may derive from other
than emotional causes (such as overwork or childbirth).
Wiry
A Wiry quality on the Heart position usually indicates stagnation
in the chest. If the pulse is Wiry and strong,it indicates stagnation
of Qi in the chest with the patient most probably suffering from
chest pain. If it is Wiry but Fine and Rapid, this may indicate that
the heart has been affected by shock. If both the Heart and Lung
positions are Wiry with strength, this may indicate stagnation of
Qi in the chest, probably due to a previous accident or blow to the
chest.
Box 50.38
 
summarizes the left Front pulse position.
 
BOX 50.38
 
   
 
LEFT-FRONT POSITION
(HEART)
• 
 
Overflowing: Deep emotional problems (anxiety,
worry), Qi rebelling upwards
• 
 
Short: sadness or grief, accident to chest
• 
 
Weak: functional weakness of the heart and
circulation, Heart-Qi, Heart-Yang or Heart-Blood
deficiency
• 
 
Floating: possibly a heart problem, high blood
pressure (Floating-Hollow on lateral and medial side),
heart dilated (Floating-Weak-Hollow), hardening of
arteries (Floating-Tight-Hollow)
• 
 
Slippery: heart disease (Slippery on medial and lateral
sides)
• 
 
Hollow: heart dilated, usually from excessive jogging,
(Hollow-Overflowing) hardening of arteries, stroke, high
blood pressure
1209
• 
 
Choppy: Heart-Blood deficiency usually from sadness,
general Blood deficiency
• 
 
Wiry: stagnation of Qi in the chest, shock (Wiry-Fine-
Rapid), accident to the chest (both Heart and Lung
positions Wiry)
Left Middle Position (Liver)
The structure of the left Middle position is illustrated in 
Figure
50.3
 
.
FIG. 50.3
 
Structure of left Middle pulse position
The left Middle position corresponds to the Liver and Gall-
Bladder and there is little disagreement on this by various authors.
Floating
A Floating quality on this position is quite common and it usually
indicates Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Qi rebelling horizontally. Of
course, this assumes that the pulse is Floating only in this position
and not Floating in general and that there are not symptoms and
signs of an exterior invasion of Wind.
If the pulse feels Floating and Wiry on the Liver position, this
indicates Liver-Yang rising; if it is Floating but Weak and slightly
Hollow, it indicates stagnation of Liver-Qi in the epigastrium and
hypochondrium.
Deep
1210
If the pulse on the Liver position is Deep and Slippery, this
indicates Phlegm affecting the Liver and Gall-Bladder. If it is Deep,
Wiry and Slippery, it indicates Gall-Bladder disease. If it is Deep
and Weak, it indicates Liver-Blood deficiency.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on the Liver pulse indicates poor liver function
due to affliction from Phlegm. If the pulse is Slippery on the
proximal side of the pulse 
position, this indicates Dampness in the
Gall-Bladder. If it is Slippery and Wiry on the proximal side, it may
indicate the presence of gall-bladder stones (in which case there
may also be small blood spots on the sclera of the eyes).
Overflowing
An Overflowing quality on the Liver position indicates Liver-Yang
rising or Liver-Fire blazing.
Wiry
A Wiry quality on the Liver position is very common as this quality
is indicative of Liver disharmonies. If it is Wiry but also ‘stagnant’,
(i.e. without a wave but strong), this indicates repressed anger.
If both left and right Middle positions are Wiry it indicates
rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach.
Box 50.39
 
summarizes the left Middle pulse position.
 
BOX 50.39
 
   
 
LEFT MIDDLE POSITION
(LIVER)
• 
 
Floating: Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Qi rebelling
horizontally, stagnation of Liver-Qi (Floating-Weak and
slightly Hollow)
• 
 
Deep: Phlegm in Liver and Gall-Bladder, Gall-Bladder
disease (Deep-Wiry-Slippery), Liver-Blood deficiency
(Deep-Weak)
• 
 
Slippery: Liver affected by Phlegm, Dampness in the
Gall-Bladder (Slippery on the proximal side), gall-
bladder stones (Slippery-Wiry on the proximal side)
• 
 
Overflowing: Liver-Yang rising or Liver-Fire blazing
• 
 
Wiry: Liver disharmony, repressed anger (Wiry-
1211
Stagnant), Liver-Qi invading the Stomach (both Middle
positions Wiry)
Left Rear Position (Kidney)
The structure of the left Rear position is illustrated in 
Figure 50.4
 
.
The left Rear position reflects the state of the Kidneys, Large
Intestine, Bladder and Uterus.
FIG. 50.4
 
Structure of left Rear pulse position
Floating
A Floating quality with strength usually relates to Large Intestine
problems, whereas a Floating quality without strength usually
reflects Kidney problems.
A Floating, Fine, Wiry and Rapid quality on the left Rear position
indicates stagnation in the Large Intestines with Damp-Heat. A
Floating, Weak quality indicates weak Kidneys. In a woman, a
Floating-Wiry quality here indicates Blood-Heat in the Uterus. A
Floating-Rapid quality on the left Kidney position in a pregnant
woman indicates the danger of miscarriage.
Deep
A Deep quality here usually indicates Kidney deficiency and
especially Kidney-Yang deficiency; it is an extremely common
1212
quality at the Kidney position, especially after the age of 40, and is
more often met in women. Two factors should be taken into
account when judging whether this position is Deep or not: first, it
is normal for this position to be deeper than the Front and Middle
ones, and secondly, it is normal for this position to be somewhat
deeper in winter.
A Deep, Fine and Weak quality on the left Kidney position
indicates a severe deficiency of the Kidneys; if, in addition, it is
also Slow, this indicates a severe deficiency of Kidney-Yang.
If the pulse is Deep, Full and Slippery on the distal side, this
indicates Dampness in the Large Intestine. If it is Deep, Weak and
Slippery in the same position, it indicates weak Large Intestine-Qi
and diarrhoea.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on the Kidney position usually indicates
retention of Dampness in the Kidneys and Bladder. According to
Dr Shen, a Slippery pulse in this position in men may indicate the
tendency to have frequent nocturnal emissions.
If the pulse is Slippery, Deep and Full on the distal side (Large
Intestine), this indicates Dampness in the Large Intestine and
possibly diarrhoea; if it is Slippery, Deep and Weak, it indicates
weak Large Intestine-Qi and possibly diarrhoea.
If the pulse is Slippery on the proximal side (Uterus), this
indicates pregnancy if the Heart pulse is strong and amenorrhoea
if the Heart pulse is weak.
Weak
A Weak quality on the left Kidney position is extremely common in
both men and women, especially after 40, and it indicates a Kidney
deficiency. In men it may be 
due to excessive sexual activity,
whereas in women it may be due to having had too many children
too close together, to menorrhagia, or to hysterectomy; in both
men and women it is often due to overwork.
If the left Kidney pulse is Weak and Intermittent this indicates a
deficiency of the Kidneys and the Original Qi; it may be due to
excessive sexual activity (or indeed any level of sexual activity)
before puberty.
1213
Fine
A Fine pulse on the Kidney position indicates deficiency of the
Original Qi and Essence; in men, this may be due to excessive
sexual activity (including masturbation).
If this pulse is Fine, Hidden and Wiry, it indicates inflammation
in the Large Intestine.
Overflowing
An Overflowing quality here is usually related to the Intestines
rather than the Kidneys: it indicates Heat in the Large Intestine. If
it is Overflowing on both left and right Kidney positions, this may
indicate prostatic hypertrophy.
Hollow
A Hollow quality on the Kidney position is usually seen in diabetes
when the patient has been on insulin for many years.
Box 50.40
 
summarizes the left Rear pulse position.
 
BOX 50.40
 
   
 
LEFT REAR POSITION
(LARGE INTESTINE AND KIDNEY)
• 
 
Floating: Large Intestine pattern (with strength),
Kidney pattern (without strength), Damp-Heat in the
Large Intestine (Floating-Fine-Wiry-Rapid), weak
Kidneys (Floating-Weak), Blood-Heat affecting Uterus
(Floating-Wiry), danger of miscarriage (Floating-Rapid)
• 
 
Deep: Kidney-Yang deficiency, severe Kidney
deficiency (Deep-Fine-Weak), severe Kidney-Yang
deficiency (Deep-Fine-Weak-Slow), Dampness in the
Large Intestine (Deep-Full-Slippery on distal side), weak
Large Intestine Qi (Deep-Weak-Slippery on distal side)
• 
 
Slippery: Dampness in Kidneys and Bladder,
Dampness in Large Intestine (Slippery-Deep-Full on
distal side), Weak Large Intestine-Qi (Slippery-Deep-
Weak), amenorrhoea (Slippery on proximal side and
Weak Heart pulse), pregnancy (Slippery on proximal
side and strong Heart pulse)
• 
 
Weak: Kidney deficiency, deficiency of the Original Qi
(Weak and Intermittent)
1214
• 
 
Fine: deficiency of the Original Qi and Essence,
inflammation of the Large Intestine (Fine-Hidden-Wiry)
• 
 
Overflowing: Heat in the Large Intestine, prostatic
hypertrophy (Overflowing on both left and right Rear
positions)
• 
 
Hollow: diabetes after long-tem insulin
administration
Right Front Position (Lungs)
The structure of the right Front position is illustrated in 
Figure
50.5
 
.
FIG. 50.5
 
Structure of right Front pulse position
The right Front position reflects the state of the Lungs. It should
be remembered that the Lung pulse is naturally quite soft and this
should be taken into account when identifying a particular
pathological quality especially the full-type ones: in other words, a
Tight or Wiry or Slippery quality on the Lung pulse is less obvious
than in other positions. Thus, a quality that might be considered
‘Slippery’ or ‘Tight’ on the Lung pulse may be normal for other
pulse positions.
When feeling the Lung pulse, we should also check a position
distal and medial to it which Dr Shen calls the ‘special’ Lung pulse
(
Fig. 50.6
 
). In normal conditions, there is no pulse in this position.
If the ‘special’ Lung pulse is present while the Lung pulse itself is
Weak, this indicates that the patient had a lung disease as a child,
1215
or that the parents had a lung disease, possibly TB of the lungs,
and that these factors have adversely affected the patient’ lungs. If
a ‘special’ Lung pulse can be felt but the Lung pulse itself is
normal, this indicates either that the patient has suffered a lung
disease during childhood (e.g. whooping cough, pneumonia) or
that the parents had suffered from a lung disease (e.g. TB of the
lungs). If the ‘special’ Lung pulse is soft and the Lung pulse itself
normal, this indicates a past problem in the lung. If the ‘special’
Lung pulse is Floating, this indicates a present problem in the
lungs, such as asthma or TB. If the 
‘special’ Lung pulse is Slippery
and the Lung pulse itself normal, this indicates retention of old
Phlegm in the lungs. If the ‘special’ Lung pulse is Slippery and
Weak and the Lung pulse itself also Weak, it may indicate TB of the
lungs.
FIG. 50.6
 
‘Special’ Lung pulse (distal and medial location)
Floating
1216
A Floating quality on the Lung position is very commonly seen in
invasions of external Wind; if the pathogenic factor is particularly
strong, the pulse will be Floating in all positions. A Floating-Tight
quality on this position indicates invasion of Wind-Cold with
prevalence of Cold, a Floating-Slow quality indicates invasion of
Wind-Cold with prevalence of Wind, and a Floating-Rapid quality
indicates invasion of Wind- Heat.
If the pulse in this position is Floating but Weak, this indicates a
previous invasion of Wind with retention of a residual pathogenic
factor in the Interior. If it is Floating, Hollow and soft, it indicates
stagnation of Qi in the Lungs from emotional problems.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on the Lung position indicates retention of
Phlegm in the Lungs.
Overflowing
An Overflowing quality on the Lung position indicates Lung-Heat.
In the absence of Heat signs, a relatively Overflowing quality in
this position indicates emotional problems deriving from grief or
worry.
Hollow
A Hollow quality with strength indicates that there might be
bleeding in the lungs; if it is also Rapid, this indicates a
forthcoming bleeding in the lungs.
Box 50.41
 
summarizes the right Front pulse position.
 
BOX 50.41
 
   
 
RIGHT FRONT POSITION
(LUNG)
• 
 
Floating: invasion of external Wind, invasion of Wind-
Cold with prevalence of Cold (Floating-Tight), invasion
of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Wind (Floating-Slow),
invasion of Wind-Heat (Floating-Rapid), residual
pathogenic factor (Floating-Weak), stagnation of Qi in
the Lungs from emotional problems (Floating-Hollow
and soft)
• 
 
Slippery: Phlegm in the Lungs
1217
• 
 
Overflowing: Lung-Heat, emotional problems from
grief or worry
• 
 
Hollow: bleeding in the lungs
Right Middle Position (Stomach And Spleen)
The structure of the right Middle position is illustrated in 
Figure
50.7
 
.
FIG. 50.7
 
Structure of right Middle pulse position
As explained in the introduction to pulse diagnosis, the terms
‘external’ and ‘internal’ describing the different location of Yang
and Yin organs on the pulse can be interpreted in three ways: they
can mean superficial and deep, lateral and medial, or distal and
proximal. In the case of the right Middle position, the most widely
used interpretations are the first two, that is, the Stomach is felt on
the surface or lateral side, and the Spleen at the deep level or
medial side. However, in the case of Stomach and Spleen, more
than any other Yin—Yang organ systems, the relationship between
the 
two is extremely close so that the pulse position needs to be
taken as a whole indicating the state of the Earth Element; the
differentiation between Stomach and Spleen should be seen not
mechanically but dynamically according to clinical manifestations.
As a rough rule of thumb, full-type qualities on this position
reflect a Stomach pathology whereas empty-type ones reflect a
Spleen pathology.
1218
Floating
A Floating quality on this position is very common and it always
reflects a Stomach pathology. It usually indicates Stomach-Heat or
Qi stagnation in the Stomach: when the Stomach pulse is Floating,
the patient experiences a pronounced feeling of distension in the
epigastrium.
If the pulse is slightly Floating but empty at the deep level, it
indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency; this quality is also frequently
seen in practice.
Wiry
A Wiry quality on the right Middle position indicates stagnation of
Qi in the Stomach, usually from dietary irregularities such as
eating too much, eating in a hurry, eating under stress, etc. If Wiry
on the distal position, this may indicate hiatus hernia. If both
Middle positions are Wiry, this indicates that rebellious Liver-Qi is
invading the Stomach.
Weak
A Weak quality on this position is extremely common and it
usually indicates a Spleen deficiency. If the pulse feels very Weak
on the Stomach position but slightly Wiry on its proximal side
(when rolling the finger very slightly proximally) this may indicate
a prolapse of the Stomach. A Stomach prolapse may cause
considerable digestive problems even when it is minimal and the
pulse reflects this accurately: the patient experiences a poor
digestion, feels sleepy after eating, suffers a feeling of heaviness of
the epigastrium and is very tired in general.
If the pulse is Weak, relatively Floating and Hollow, this
indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency with slight Qi stagnation; the
patient experiences excessive stomach acidity and pronounced
epigastric distension.
If the pulse is Weak, and very slightly Wiry, and the Lung pulse
is Weak, it may indicate a stomach ulcer.
If both right and left Middle positions are Weak, Deep and Slow,
this indicates a deficiency of Stomach and Spleen
1219
Fine
A Fine quality on the right Middle position is common, and
indicates a deficiency of both Spleen and Stomach. If it is Fine,
Deep and very slightly Wiry, this may indicate a stomach ulcer; if it
is Fine, Deep, Slippery and Rapid, it indicates Damp-Heat in the
Stomach and Spleen.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on this position indicates Dampness or Phlegm:
Dampness may affect both Spleen and Stomach, whereas Phlegm
usually affects only the Stomach. If the pulse is Slippery and Full,
this usually indicates Phlegm in the Stomach; if it is Slippery but
Weak and relatively soft, it indicates chronic Dampness in the
Spleen.
Soggy
A Soggy quality on this position is common and it indicates
chronic Dampness in the Spleen: with Spleen-Qi deficiency; it is
frequently seen in postviral fatigue syndrome.
Hollow
A Hollow quality on the right Middle position indicates bleeding
in the stomach; if the pulse is Hollow and Rapid, it may indicate a
forthcoming stomach haemorrhage.
Box 50.42
 
summarizes the right Middle pulse position.
 
BOX 50.42
 
   
 
RIGHT MIDDLE POSITION
(STOMACH AND SPLEEN)
• 
 
Floating: Stomach-Heat, Qi stagnation in the
Stomach, Stomach-Yin deficiency (Floating but Empty at
the deep level)
• 
 
Wiry: Qi stagnation in the Stomach, eating too fast,
possibly hiatus hernia (Wiry on distal position),
rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach (both Middle
positions Wiry)
• 
 
Weak: Spleen-Qi deficiency, prolapse of the Stomach
(Weak on the main position and slightly Wiry on the
1220
proximal side), Stomach-Yin deficiency (Weak-Floating-
Hollow), stomach ulcer (Weak and slightly Wiry, with
Weak Lung pulse), deficiency of Stomach and Spleen
(Weak-Deep-Slow on both Middle positions)
• 
 
Fine: deficiency of Stomach and Spleen, stomach ulcer
(Fine-Deep and very slightly Wiry), Damp-Heat in
Stomach and Spleen (Fine-Deep-Slippery-Rapid)
• 
 
Slippery: Dampness or Phlegm in the Stomach
(Slippery-Full) or Dampness in Spleen (Slippery-Weak)
• 
 
Soggy: chronic Dampness in the Spleen with Spleen-
Qi deficiency
• 
 
Hollow: bleeding in the stomach with forthcoming
stomach haemorrhage (Hollow-Rapid)
Right Rear Position (Small Intestine And
Kidneys)
The structure of the right Rear position is illustrated in 
Figure 50.8
. This position reflects the state of the Kidneys, Small Intestine and
Lower Burner.
FIG. 50.8
 
Structure of right rear pulse position
Floating
A Floating quality on the right Rear position usually reflects a
1221
pathology of the Small Intestine (i.e. Heat in the Small Intestine).
Weak
A Weak quality on the right Rear position usually reflects a
deficiency of the Kidneys. If the pulse is Deep and Weak it usually
indicates a deficiency of Kidney- Yang.
Slippery
A Slippery quality on the right Rear position usually reflects a
pathology of the Small Intestine (i.e. Dampness). If it is Slippery
and Wiry it indicates Damp-Heat in the Small Intestine with Qi
stagnation; this pulse quality on both rear positions is frequently
seen in ulcerative colitis. If the pulse is Slippery but Deep and
slightly Weak, this indicates retention of Dampness in the Small
Intestine and Kidneys.
Wiry
A Wiry quality on the right Rear position usually reflects a
pathology of the Small Intestine and particularly indicates Qi
stagnation. If the pulse in this position is Wiry, Long and Rapid it
indicates Damp-Heat and Qi stagnation in the Small Intestine; this
pulse picture is frequently seen in ulcerative colitis. If the pulse is
Wiry but Fine and Rapid, this indicates Damp-Heat in the Small
Intestine occurring against a background of Kidney deficiency.
Box 50.43
 
summarizes the right Rear pulse position.
 
BOX 50.43
 
   
 
RIGHT REAR POSITION
(SMALL INTESTINE AND KIDNEYS)
• 
 
Floating: Heat in the Small Intestine
• 
 
Weak: Kidney deficiency, Kidney-Yang deficiency
(Weak and Deep)
• 
 
Slippery: Dampness in the Small-Intestine, Damp-
Heat with Qi stagnation in the Small Intestine (Slippery-
Wiry), ulcerative colitis (Slippery-Wiry on both rear
positions, retention of Dampness in the Small Intestine
and Kidneys (Slippery-Deep-Weak)
• 
 
Wiry: stagnation of Qi in the Small Intestine, Damp-
Heat with Qi stagnation in the Small Intestine (Wiry-
1222
Long-Rapid), Damp-Heat in the Small Intestine with
Kidney deficiency (Wiry-Fine-Rapid)
PULSE QUALITIES INDICATING
DANGEROUS CONDITIONS
Traditionally, there are 10 pulse qualities that indicate dangerous
conditions and a poor prognosis. These dangerous qualities are:
 
• 
 
Boiling cauldron pulse
• 
 
Circling fish pulse
• 
 
Swimming shrimp pulse
• 
 
Leaking roof pulse
• 
 
Pecking bird pulse
• 
 
Untying rope pulse
• 
 
Bouncing stone pulse
• 
 
Upturned knife pulse
• 
 
Spinning bean pulse
• 
 
Sesame seed hasty pulse.
Boiling cauldron pulse
This pulse is in the skin, floating and extremely rapid so that it
cannot be counted. It feels like water boiling furiously in a
cauldron; it is without root.
This pulse indicates extreme Heat in the three Yang and
complete drying up of Yin.
Circling fish pulse
This pulse is in the skin, it is like a fish with the head still and the
tail waving and shaking; it is sometimes there and sometimes not.
It is also extremely rapid.
This pulse indicates extreme Cold in the three Yin and Collapse
of Yang.
1223
Swimming shrimp pulse
This pulse is in the skin but its shape is somewhat hidden;
sometimes it comes, sometimes it does not; it jumps and darts like
a shrimp.
This pulse indicates collapse of both Yin and Yang.
Leaking roof pulse
This pulse is in between the muscles and sinews, it is like water
dripping, one drop at a time, at long, uneven intervals, each drop
splashing without strength.
This pulse indicates collapse of Qi of the Stomach and Spleen.
Pecking bird pulse
This pulse is in between the muscles and sinews, it is rapid and
irregular, stopping and starting. It is like a bird pecking at food
three then five times in a row, stopping and starting at irregular
intervals.
This pulse indicates exhaustion of Spleen-Qi and of Food-Qi (
Gu
Qi
 
).
Untying rope pulse
This pulse is in between the muscles and sinews; it is rapid and
chaotic beating at irregular intervals.
This pulse indicates collapse of Kidney-Qi.
Bouncing stone pulse
This pulse is in between the muscles and sinews and is like a
finger tapping hard on a stone at irregular intervals.
This pulse denotes exhaustion of Kidney-Water.
Upturned knife pulse
This pulse is like the blade of a knife upside down; it is thin but
hard and tense. On the superficial level it is thin, hard and tense
and at the deep level it is large, hard and tense.
This pulse indicates exhaustion of Liver- and Kidney-Yin.
1224
Spinning bean pulse
This pulse feels as it is were spinning, it is short and moving and
feels like Coix seeds (Yi Yi Ren 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
). It feels
also like rolling pearls.
This pulse indicates exhastion of all the Internal Organs.
Sesame seed hasty pulse
This pulse is rapid and stops at irregular intervals (like the Hasty
pulse); it is small and shaped like a sesame seed.
This pulse indicates exhaustion of Qi and Blood.
A common characteristic of most of the danger pulse qualities is
the irregularity of the beat; they therefore indicate a pathology of
the heart in a Western sense. Many of them are also rapid
indicating not necessarily Heat but a complete collapse of Qi and
Blood, which makes the pulse rapid.
THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS ON THE
PULSE
I list below some drugs and their effect on the pulse. This list is
not comprehensive but is limited only to the effects I have
observed in clinical practice. It should be remembered that drugs
will not always have the effects listed below as different people
react in different ways to the same drug. For example, it is
common for antibiotics to cause a partial peeling of the tongue
but, in some patients, they tend to make the coating thick.
Tranquillizers and hypnotics
Tranquillizers (anxiolytics) and hypnotics (sleeping pills) have a
definite influence on the pulse. In my experience, they cause what
I call the ‘Stagnant’ pulse quality (see above).
The tranquillizers cause a pulse that feels reluctant to come, as if
being suppressed, and seems unlikely to last; it does not flow
smoothly and does not have a ‘wave’. It is somewhat Wiry but it
does not have the strength or wave of a truly Wiry pulse.
1225
Antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants tend to cause the pulse to lose its ‘root’,
that is, it becomes slightly empty at the deep level and very
slightly Floating.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI)
SSRI antidepressants tend to cause Qi stagnation in the digestive
system and affect the Stomach and Spleen. The Stomach and
Spleen pulse position tends to become somewhat Slippery or Wiry,
or both.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI)
These antidepressants tend to affect the Liver and often cause
Liver-Yang rising. They tend to make the pulse Wiry.
Beta blockers
Beta blockers are probably the drugs with the clearest effect on the
pulse. They make the pulse slow and this should definitely be
taken into account, lest we conclude wrongly that the patient
suffers from a Cold syndrome. They also tend to make the pulse
Deep and somewhat Weak. In my experience, this type of drug
makes pulse reading very difficult and I almost tend to discount
the pulse altogether when a patient is on beta blockers.
ACE inhibitors
ACE inhibitors affects the Kidneys and make the pulse Deep and
Weak on both Rear positions.
Warfarin
Warfarin tends to make the pulse relatively Overflowing and
slightly Empty at the middle level.
Diuretics
Diuretics tend to make the pulse slightly Empty at the deep level.
1226
They may also affect the Kidneysand make the pulse very Weak on
both Rear positions.
H
2
 
-Receptor antagonists
These drugs tend to affect the Stomach and Spleen and may make
the right Middle position slightly Floating-Empty.
Insulin
Long-term use of insulin makes the pulse slightly Slippery but
Hollow.
Box 50.44
 
summarizes the effects of drugs on the pulse.
 
BOX 50.44
 
   
 
EFFECTS OF DRUGS ON
THE PULSE
• 
 
Tranquillizers and hypnotics: Stagnant pulse
• 
 
Tricyclic antidepressants: Empty at deep level and
slightly Floating
• 
 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: Slippery or
Wiry on right Middle position
• 
 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: Wiry
• 
 
Beta blockers: Slow
• 
 
ACE inhibitors: Deep and Weak on both Rear
positions
• 
 
Warfarin: Overflowing and slightly Empty at middle
level
• 
 
Diuretics: Empty at the deep level or very Weak on
both Rear positions
• 
 
H
2
 
-receptor antagonists: Floating-Empty on right
Middle position
• 
 
Insulin: Slippery and Hollow
NOTES
1. Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
1227
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:47 First published c. 
AD
 
100
2. Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of
Traditional Chinese Medicine. An Explanation of the
Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases (
Shang Han Lun Shi
 
). Shanghai Science Publishing House: Shanghai,
1980:8 ‘The Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ was
written by Zhang Zhong Jing in c. 220
BC
3. Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:19 First published c. 
AD
 
100
4. 
The Lilium Syndrome is described in 
Chapter 3
 
of the
‘Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet’. The
syndrome is described as follows: 
‘The patient wants to eat
but is reluctant to swallow food and unwilling to speak. He
prefers to lie in bed yet cannot lie quietly due to
restlessness. He may want to walk about but soon becomes
tired. Now and then he may enjoy eating certain foods but
at other times he cannot even tolerate the smell of food. He
may feel either too cold or too hot but without fever or
aversion to cold. He also has a bitter taste in the mouth and
the urine is dark. No drugs appear to be effective to cure
this syndrome; after taking the medicine there may be
vomiting and diarrhoea. The disease haunts the patient and
although his appearance is normal, he is actually suffering.
His pulse is Rapid. ’
 
This apparently strange syndrome
does occur in practice and is seen in patients who are
depressed.
5. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:98 First
published c. 100
BC
6. Cited in Jun, Liu Guan. Pulse Diagnosis (
Mai Zhen
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1981; 90.
7. 
Simple Questions, p. 98.
8. 
Simple Questions, p. 118.
9. 
Simple Questions, p. 107.
1228
10. 
Simple Questions, p. 116.
11. 
Simple Questions, p. 98.
12. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:17 First published c. 100
BC
1229
CHAPTER 51
 
PALPATION OF
PARTS OF THE
BODY
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
PALPATION OF THE CHEST AND ABDOMEN
Palpation of the chest
Palpation of the abdomen
PALPATION OF THE SKIN
Body skin
Forearm diagnosis
Palpation of temples in children
PALPATION OF HANDS AND FEET
Temperature
Palpation and comparison of dorsum and palm
Palpation of feet and hands in children
Palpation of the nails
1230
PALPATION OF ACUPUNCTURE POINTS
Front Collecting (
Mu
 
) points
Back Transporting (
Bei Shu
 
) points (
Mu
 
)
points
Source (
Yuan
 
) points
INTRODUCTION
Palpation is used to detect the temperature, moisture and texture
of the skin, the consistency of the deeper tissues and the presence
of masses. Palpation is carried out on the skin, hands and feet,
chest, abdomen and acupuncture points and channels.
There are three different palpation techniques:
 
• 
 
touching
• 
 
stroking
• 
 
pressing
Touching
This consists simply in touching the skin of the patient lightly. This
is done to detect the temperature and moisture of the skin and to
check whether the patient is sweating. Detecting whether the
patient is sweating is important in exterior invasions of Wind to
differentiate between an Attack of Wind and an Attack of Cold
within the Greater-Yang pattern of invasion of Wind-Cold. The
temperature of the skin of the forehead is also important in
exterior invasions of Wind because it reflects the intensity of the
‘fever’ (or heat emission as defined in 
Chapter 43
 
).
Stroking
This consists in stroking the skin and deeper tissues of the patient
and it is usually carried out on the chest, abdomen and limbs.
Stroking serves to determine the presence of tenderness or
1231
swelling and it is used to distinguish Full from Empty conditions.
Pressing
This consists in pressing relatively hard to still deeper levels
usually of the abdomen. It serves to determine the presence of
pain or masses and is used to establish the Full or Empty
condition of the Internal Organs.
These three techniques correspond to three different degrees of
pressures reflecting the state of different energetic layers. Thus,
touching
 
reveals the state of the skin, 
stroking
 
that of the flesh and
muscles and 
pressing
 
that of the sinews and bones and of the
Internal Organs.
PALPATION OF THE CHEST AND
ABDOMEN
Palpation of the chest and abdomen is an important part of
diagnosing by palpation because it reveals the state of the Internal
Organs. 
Chapter 35
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: ‘
 
The internal
organs reside inside the chest and abdominal cavity like precious
objects in a chest, each with its own specific location
 
.’
 
1
 
The
‘Simple Questions’ in 
Chapter 22
 
says: ‘
 
When the Heart is diseased
there is pain in the centre of the chest and hypochondrial fullness
and pain … When the Kidneys are diseased there is swelling of the
abdomen
 
.’
 
2
The chest and abdominal areas influenced by the various
Internal Organs are illustrated in 
Figure 51.1
 
.
1232
FIG. 51.1
 
Areas of the chest and abdomen and the Internal Organs
Temperature
When palpating the abdomen one should first of all feel the
temperature of different areas: if the abdomen feels cold on
palpation this indicates either Cold or Yang deficiency; if it feels
hot on palpation this indicates Heat. If the pulse picture indicates
Heat but the abdomen is not hot on palpation, this indicates exter-
nal 
Heat. In children, a hot sensation of the abdomen on palpation
often indicates retention of food.
1233
Texture
Next, one should check the texture of the abdomen, that is,
whether it feels soft or hard. The normal abdomen should feel
relatively soft on a superficial palpation but firm with a deeper
pressure. If the abdomen feels very soft and flaccid on palpation,
this indicates a deficiency condition of the Spleen and Stomach if
it is the epigastrium, or the Spleen and Kidneys if the lower
abdomen; the latter sign is common in women who have had
several children.
If the abdomen feels hard on palpation, this indicates a Full
condition, which is usually Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, Dampness
or retention of food; each of these conditions presents with
different subjective symptoms, which are distension, pain and
fullness respectively.
Palpation of the abdomen is quite important in invasions of
Wind, especially in children, because if the abdomen feels soft the
pathogenic factor is usually still on the Exterior, whereas if it feels
hard the pathogenic factor has penetrated to the Interior.
Box 51.1
 
summarizes the significance of different textures on
palpation.
 
BOX 51.1
 
   
 
TEXTURE OF THE ABDOMEN
• 
 
Soft and flaccid epigastrium: Stomach and Spleen
deficiency
• 
 
Soft and flaccid lower abdomen: Spleen and Kidney
deficiency
• 
 
Hard: Full condition
— 
 
stagnation (with feeling of distension)
— 
 
Dampness (with feeling of fullness)
— 
 
Blood stasis (with pain)
— 
 
retention of food (with feeling of
fullness)
• 
 
Soft during invasions of Wind in children: pathogenic
factor still on the Exterior
• 
 
Hard during invasions of Wind in children:
pathogenic factor in the Interior
1234
Distension versus fullness
One can distinguish distension from fullness on palpation. Besides
being subjective symptoms, distension and fullness are also
objective signs. The distended abdomen feels hard but elastic, like
a drum, whereas fullness of the abdomen manifests with a hard-
ness of the abdomen but without distension on palpation.
Tenderness
The abdomen should then be palpated to check for tenderness and
pain. If a light palpation elicits tenderness or pain, this indicates a
Full condition, which may be Qi stagnation, Blood stasis,
Dampness, retention of food, Heat or Cold. If the pressure of
palpation relieves the pain, this indicates a deficient condition of
the Spleen and Stomach if it is in the epigastrium, or of the Spleen,
Kidneys and Liver if in the lower abdo-men. If the abdomen feels
tender only under deep pressure, this usually indicates Blood
stasis. If superficial pressure of the abdomen relieves a pain but
deeper pressure elicits a discomfort, this indi-cates a combined
condition of Deficiency and Excess (e.g. stagnation of Liver-Qi with
Spleen-Qi deficiency).
Box 51.2
 
summarizes the significance of tenderness on
palpation.
 
BOX 51.2
 
   
 
TENDERNESS ON
PALPATION
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: Full condition (Qi
stagnation, Blood stasis, Dampness, Retention of Food,
Heat or Cold)
• 
 
Tenderness relieved by palpation: Stomach and
Spleen deficiency (epigastrium) or Liver and Kidney
deficiency (lower abdomen)
• 
 
Tender on deep pressure: Blood stasis
• 
 
Tenderness relieved by superficial pressure and
elicited by deeper pressure: combined Deficiency and
Excess
1235
Lumps
Abdominal masses are called 
Ji Ju. Ji
 
indicates actual abdominal
masses which are fixed and immovable; if there is an associated
pain, its location is fixed. These masses are due to stasis of Blood
and I call them ‘Blood masses’. 
Ju
 
indicates abdominal masses
which come and go, do not have a fixed location and are movable.
If there is an associated pain, it too comes and goes and changes
location. Such masses are due to stagnation of Qi and I call them
‘Qi masses’.
Actual abdominal lumps therefore pertain to the category of
abdominal masses and specifically 
Ji
 
masses (i.e. Blood masses).
Another name for abdominal masses was 
Zheng Jia, Zheng
 
being
equivalent to 
Ji
 
(i.e. acute, fixed masses) and 
Jia
 
being equivalent to
Ju
 
(i.e. non-substantial masses from stagnation of Qi). The term
Zheng Jia
 
normally referred to abdominal masses occurring only in
women, but although these masses are more frequent in women
they do occur in men as well.
When palpating the abdomen one should feel for lumps. Lumps
that come and go and are associated with distension indicate Qi
stagnation, whereas lumps that are fixed and painful indicate
Blood stasis. Soft and movable abdominal lumps may indicate
Phlegm. Lumps in the left-lower abdominal region may simply
indicate faeces in the colon.
Palpable lumps in the lower abdomen may be due to Qi
stagnation, Blood stasis, Damp-Phlegm or Damp-Heat.
Abdominal lumps, if due to Qi stagnation, normally feel soft
and come and go with emotional moods; if due to Blood stasis they
feel hard on palpation and are usually associated with pain; if from
Damp-Heat they may also be painful and, when palpated, very
tender; if from Damp-Phlegm, they feel softer than lumps from
Blood stasis or Damp-Heat. A typical example of an abdominal
lump from Blood stasis is a myoma, whereas an example of that
from Damp-Phlegm or Damp-Heat is an ovarian cyst.
Box 51.3
 
summarizes the types of abdominal masses.
 
BOX 51.3
 
   
 
TWO TYPES OF ABDOMINAL
MASSES
• 
 
Qi (
Ju
 
or 
Jia
 
): relatively soft masses that come and go
1236
• 
 
Blood (
Ji
 
or 
Zheng
 
): hard, fixed masses
Palpation Of The Chest
Palpation of the chest includes palpation of the following areas:
 
• 
 
apical pulse
• 
 
chest
• 
 
area under xyphoid process
• 
 
breast.
Apical pulse
The apical pulse can be palpated in the fifth intercostal space;
from a Western, anatomical point of view, it is the palpation of the
left ventricle of the heart, whereas in ancient Chinese medicine it
was called the pulsation of 
Xu Li
 
, which relates to the Great
Connecting channel of the Stomach and reflects the state of the
Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
). For a description of the ancient
interpretation of this pulsation, see 
Chapter 13
 
in 
Part 1
 
,
‘Diagnosis by Observation’.
The pulsation of the apical pulse reflects the state of the
Gathering Qi and, under normal conditions, it should be felt
clearly but not be hard and it should be relatively slow; this
indicates a normal state of the Gathering Qi. If the pulsation of the
apical pulse is feeble and without strength, this indicates a
deficiency of the Gathering Qi and therefore of Lungs and Heart. If
the pulsation feels too strong and hard, this indicates an Excess
condition of the Lungs or Heart, or both. However, in some cases,
when the left ventricle is enlarged, the apical pulse may feel ‘large’
but empty and this indicates Heart-Qi deficiency.
If the apical pulse stops and starts, this may indicate that the
patient has suffered a severe shock; the same sign may also be
seen in alcoholism.
The pulsation of the apical pulse should also be compared with
that of the radial pulse and the two should be similar to each other
1237
(e.g. if the apical pulse feels feeble, the radial pulse should also
feel Weak, Empty or Choppy). A discrepancy between the apical
and the radial pulse is a poor prognostic sign and it often indicates
heart disease.
The apical pulse may become affected by short-term influences
such as shock, fright or a severe outburst of anger in which case it
becomes very rapid.
Box 51.4
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the apical pulse.
 
BOX 51.4
 
   
 
APICAL PULSE
• 
 
Clearly felt, not hard, relatively slow: normal
• 
 
Feeble and without strength: deficiency of the
Gathering Qi (
Zong Qi
 
)
• 
 
Strong and hard: Excess condition of the Lungs and/or
Heart
• 
 
Large but empty: Heart-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Stopping and starting: severe shock or alcoholism
• 
 
Discrepancy between apical and radial pulse: poor
prognosis
• 
 
Rapid: shock, fright or outburst of anger
Chest
The centre of the chest corresponds to the Heart and the rest of it
to the Lungs. Palpation of the chest reveals the state of the Heart,
Lungs and Pericardium and generally speaking, tenderness on
palpation indicates a Full condition of one of these organs. For
example, if the chest feels very tender even on light palpation in
the centre, in the area of Ren-17 Shanzhong, this may indicate
Heart-Blood stasis.
If the chest is tender on palpation in the areas around the
centre, it usually indicates an Excess condition of the Lungs and
often retention of Phlegm in the 
Lungs. By contrast, if palpation of
the chest relieves discomfort, it indicates Deficiency of the Heart
or Lungs. If superficial palpation of the chest relieves a pain but
the patient feels discomfort with a deeper pressure, it indicates a
combined condition of Deficiency and Excess.
1238
Box 51.5
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the chest.
 
BOX 51.5
 
   
 
CHEST
• 
 
Tender with light palpation of Ren-17: Heart-Blood
stasis
• 
 
Tender around the centre: Excess condition of the
Lungs
• 
 
Tenderness relieved by palpation: Deficiency
condition of Heart or Lungs
• 
 
Tenderness relieved by light palpation but elicited by
deeper palpation: combined Deficiency and Excess
Area under xyphoid process
The area under the xyphoid process reflects the state of the
Stomach, Heart and Penetrating Vessel. This area readily reflects
patterns deriving from emotional problems. For example, if the
area feels relatively hard and knotted, this indicates Heart-Qi
stagnation from emotional problems such as sadness and grief. If
the area is soft but painful, it indicates Stomach-Heat combined
with Stomach-Qi deficiency. The Penetrating Vessel also affects this
area and a knotted and full feeling in this area occurs often in the
pattern of rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel, but only when it
is associated with other abdominal, chest and throat symptoms.
Box 51.6
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the area under the
xyphoid process.
 
BOX 51.6
 
   
 
AREA UNDER THE XYPHOID
PROCESS
• 
 
Hard and knotted: stagnation of Heart-Qi
• 
 
Soft on palpation and painful: Stomach-Heat with
Stomach-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Hard and full: rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel
Breast
1239
Palpation of the breasts in women is carried out when there are
breast lumps. Breast lumps may be malignant or benign. The
purpose of palpation in Chinese medicine is never to replace the
Western diagnosis – we should never rely on palpation to
distinguish benign from malignant lumps – but to identify the
patterns causing them. The palpation of lumps should take into
consideration their hardness, their edges and their mobility:
 
• 
 
relatively soft: Phlegm
• 
 
relatively hard: Blood stasis
• 
 
distinct edges: Phlegm
• 
 
indistinct edges: Toxic Heat
• 
 
mobile on palpation: Phlegm
• 
 
immovable on palpation: Blood stasis or Toxic Heat.
Small, movable lumps with distinct edges that change size
according to the menstrual cycle normally indicate fibrocystic
disease of the breast, which is usually due to a combination of
Phlegm and Qi stagnation. A single, relatively hard, movable lump
with distinct edges which may be also slightly painful usually
indicates a fibroadenoma, which from the Chinese point of view is
due to a combination of Phlegm and Blood stasis. A single, hard,
immovable lump with indistinct margins, without pain, may
indicate carcinoma of the breast which, in Chinese medicine, is
usually due to a combination of Phlegm, Qi stagnation and Blood
stasis occurring against a background of disharmony of the
Penetrating and Directing Vessels.
Box 51.7
 
summarizes the causes of the most common breast
lumps.
 
BOX 51.7
 
   
 
COMMON CAUSES OF
BREAST LUMPS
• 
 
Fibrocystic disease (Qi stagnation and Phlegm): small,
multiple, movable lumps with distinct edges, changing
size according to the menstrual cycle
• 
 
Fibroadenoma (Phlegm and Blood stasis): single,
relatively hard, movable lump with distinct edges,
1240
possibly painful
• 
 
Carcinoma of the breast (Blood stasis and Phlegm):
single, hard, immovable, painless lump with indistinct
margins
Palpation Of The Abdomen
The palpation areas of the abdomen are as follows (
Fig. 51.2
 
):
1241
FIG. 51.2
 
Abdominal areas
 
• 
 
hypochondrium
• 
 
epigastrium
• 
 
umbilical area
• 
 
lateral-lower abdomen
• 
 
central-lower abdomen.
1242
Hypochondrium
The hypochondrium includes the lateral side of the rib cage and
also the area immediately below it. It reflects the state of the Liver
and Gall-Bladder. If the hypochondrium is distinctly tender on
palpation, this indicates stagnation of Liver-Qi, Liver-Blood stasis
or Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder. If pal-pation of the
hypochondrium relieves the patient’s discomfort, this may indicate
Liver-Blood deficiency.
Box 51.8
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the
hypochondrium.
 
BOX 51.8
 
   
 
HYPOCHONDRIUM
• 
 
Tender on palpation: Liver-Qi stagnation, Liver-Blood
stasis, Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Discomfort relieved by palpation: Liver-Blood
deficiency
Epigastrium
The epigastric area is the area contained between the xyphoid
process, the costal margins and the umbilicus. Palpation of the
epigastrium reveals primarily the condition of the Stomach and
Spleen. The normal epigastrium should feel elastic but neither
hard nor too soft. The area immediately below the xyphoid process
reflects the condition of both the Stomach and the Heart and
should feel relatively softer than the rest of the epigastrium; if this
area feels hard on palpation, it often indicates stagnation of Qi or
Blood of the Heart, which is usually due to emotional problems.
If the epigastrium feels hard on palpation, this indicates an
Excess condition of the Stomach, which may be stagnation of Qi,
Blood stasis, Dampness or retention of food. If the epigastrium
feels distended like a drum, this indicates Qi stagnation. If the
patient has a subjective sensation of fullness but the epigastrium
is soft on palpation, this indicates a condition of mixed Deficiency
and Excess, which is often characterized by Stomach-Heat and
Spleen-Qi deficiency. If pal-pation of the epigastrium relieves the
patient’s discomfort, this indicates a Deficiency condition of the
1243
Stomach.
Box 51.9
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the epigastrium.
 
BOX 51.9
 
   
 
EPIGASTRIUM
• 
 
Elastic, neither hard nor soft: healthy state of Stomach
and Spleen
• 
 
Hardness in the area below the xyphoid process:
stagnation of Qi or Blood of the Heart, usually due to
emotional problems
• 
 
Hard: Excess condition of the Stomach (Qi stagnation,
Blood stasis, Dampness or retention of Food)
• 
 
Distended like a drum: Qi stagnation
• 
 
Soft on palpation with subjective sensation of
Fullness: Stomach-Heat and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Umbilical region
The umbilical region reflects the state of the Kidneys and of the
Penetrating and Directing Vessels. It should feel elastic but not
hard. If it feels hard and full on palpation, this indicates either
stagnation of Qi or Blood stasis in the Penetrating Vessel. If it is
painful on palpation, this indicates Blood stasis in the Penetrating
Vessel. If it feels very soft on palpation, this indicates a Kidney
deficiency and a deficiency of the Penetrating and Directing
Vessels.
Box 51.10
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the unbilical
region.
 
BOX 51.10
 
   
 
UMBILICAL REGION
• 
 
Hard and full: stagnation of Qi or Blood stasis in
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Pain: Blood stasis in the Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Soft: Kidney deficiency and deficiency of Penetrating
and Directing Vessels
1244
Umbilical pulse
Palpation of the abdomen should always include palpation of the
pulse around the umbilicus by using three fingers and the thumb
simultaneously, that is the middle finger above the umbilicus, the
index and ring finger to the right and left respectively and the
thumb below the umbilicus. From the Chinese point of view this is
the pulsation of the Original Qi, which should be strong and
regular. If this pulse pulsates more than five times per breathing
cycle, it indicates Heat in the Penetrating and Directing Vessels. If
this pulse feels faint, and there is a feeling of heat on palpation, it
indicates Yin deficiency in the Penetrating Vessel. If this pulse is
slower than two pulsations per breathing cycle it indicates a severe
deficiency of the Original Qi. If the pulsation around the
umbilicus is slow and it feels cold on palpation, it indicates a
deficiency of the Fire of the Gate of Life.
Box 51.11
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the umbilical
pulse.
 
BOX 51.11
 
   
 
UMBILICAL PULSE
• 
 
Strong and regular umbilical pulse: healthy Original
Qi
• 
 
Umbilical pulse which beats more than five times per
breathing cycle: Heat in the Penetrating and Directing
Vessels
• 
 
Faint umbilical pulse with a feeling of heat on
palpation: Yin deficiency in the Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Umbilical pulse slower than two pulsations per
breathing cycle: severe deficiency of the Original Qi
• 
 
Slow umbilical pulse with a feeling of cold on
palpation: deficiency of the Fire of the Gate of Life
Lateral-lower abdomen
The lateral-lower abdominal areas are called 
Shao Fu
 
and they
reflect the state of the Intestines and of the Penetrating Vessel. If
hard on palpation, they indi-cate either Dampness in the
Intestines or Blood stasis 
in the Penetrating Vessel. If painful on
1245
palpation, they indicate Blood stasis in the Penetrating Vessel. A
feeling of mass in the lateral lower abdomen also indicates Blood
stasis in the Intestines or in the Penetrating Vessel.
Box 51.12
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the lateral-lower
area.
 
BOX 51.12
 
   
 
LATERAL-LOWER
ABDOMEN
• 
 
Hard: Dampness in Intestines or Blood stasis in
Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Pain: Blood stasis in Penetrating Vessel
• 
 
Feeling of mass: Blood stasis in the Intestines or
Penetrating Vessel
Central-lower abdomen
The central-lower abdominal area is called 
Xiao Fu
 
and it reflects
the state of the Small Intestine, Kidneys, Bladder, Uterus and Liver.
If this area feels hard on palpation, it may indicate Dampness in
the Intestines or Bladder. If it is painful on palpation, it may
indicate Qi stagnation or Blood stasis in the Intestines or Bladder.
Box 51.13
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the central-lower
area.
 
BOX 51.13
 
   
 
CENTRAL-LOWER
ABDOMEN
• 
 
Hard: Dampness in the Small Intestine or Bladder
• 
 
Pain: Qi stagnation of Blood stasis in Small Intestine
or Bladder
PALPATION OF THE SKIN
Palpation of the skin includes palpation of the body skin and
palpation of the forearm. Palpation of the skin includes the
following areas:
1246
 
• 
 
body skin
• 
 
forearm diagnosis
• 
 
palpation of temples in children.
Body Skin
Palpation of the body skin is aimed at assessing its temperature,
moistness and texture.
Temperature
The temperature of the skin reflects conditions of Heat or Yang
deficiency. If the skin feels hot on palpation it usually indicates a
condition of Heat, whereas if it feels Cold this indicates Yang
deficiency or Cold. Sometimes the pulse is Rapid but the abdomen
does not feel hot; this indicates external Heat. A hot abdomen in
children indicates retention of food.
Box 51.14
 
summarizes findings of heat and cold on palpation.
 
BOX 51.14
 
   
 
TEMPERATURE
• 
 
Cold: Cold or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Hot: Heat
• 
 
Pulse Rapid but abdomen not hot: external Heat
• 
 
Hot abdomen in children: retention of food
Energetic layers
A hot feeling of the skin on palpation may be related more
specifically to the five energetic layers of skin, muscles, blood
vessels, sinews and bones according to the amount of pressure
exerted. These five energetic layers reflect the state of the Lungs,
Spleen, Heart, Liver and Kidneys and they may be grouped into
three, (i.e. skin, muscles and blood vessels, and sinews and bones),
corresponding to three different pressures of palpation.
 
There are three energetic layers of palpation:
• 
 
skin
1247
• 
 
muscles and blood vessels
• 
 
sinews and bones.
Skin
The skin energetic layer is felt by palpating very lightly; if it feels
hot on palpation and the feeling of heat subsides after several
minutes, this indicates exterior Heat from invasion of Wind or
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency affecting the Lungs.
Muscles and blood vessels
The muscles and blood vessels energetic layer is felt by palpating
the skin with a slightly harder pressure; if it feels hot at this level,
this indicates interior Heat affecting the Heart or Spleen.
Sinews and bones
The sinews and bones energetic layer is felt by palpating the skin
with a still harder pressure; if it feels hot at this level, this
indicates Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency usually affecting the
Liver and Kidneys.
Box 51.15
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the energetic
layers.
 
BOX 51.15
 
   
 
PALPATION OF SKIN
ENERGETIC LAYERS
• 
 
Skin hot: Wind-Heat or Empty Heat from Yin
deficiency
• 
 
Muscles and blood vessels hot: interior Heat in Heart
or Spleen
• 
 
Sinews and bones hot: Empty Heat from Yin
deficiency of Liver or Kidneys
Moisture
Palpation of the skin should take into consideration the moisture
1248
of the skin: the normal skin should be slightly moist and elastic. If
the skin is too moist from sweat, this indicates either Yang
deficiency or Heat, whereas if moist and greasy, it indicates
Dampness or Phlegm. If the skin feels dry on palpation, this
indicates Blood deficiency, Yin deficiency or severe Blood stasis. If
the skin feels rough on palpation, this indicates severe Blood
deficiency, often as an underlying condition of Painful Obstruction
Syndrome (
Bi
 
).
Texture
If the skin feels rough and very dry and scaly, this indicates severe
deficiency and Dryness of Blood together with a deficiency of the
Spleen. If the skin feels swollen on palpation and the exerting of
pressure with the thumb leaves it dented, this indicates oedema
from Yang deficiency; if the skin feels swollen but the exerting of
pressure with the thumb does not leave it dented, this indicates Qi
stagnation or Blood stasis.
Forehead
Palpating the forehead to feel its temperature was, in ancient
China, a method of ascertaining whether or not the patient was
suffering from a ‘fever’. An objective sensation of heat on
palpation of the forehead is called 
fa re
 
, which literally means
‘emission of heat’ and which is often translated as ‘fever’; however,
this is not entirely correct as the patient may or may not have a
fever. Whenever ‘fever’ is mentioned in this context, it is intended
as an objective feeling of heat of the forehead on palpation. An
objective sensation of heat on palpation of the forehead together
with a subjective feeling of aversion to cold indicates invasion of
external Wind; such a sensation together with a subjective feeling
of heat indicates internal Heat.
The temperature of the forehead should be compared with that
of the palms: if the forehead is hotter than the palms, this
generally indicates exterior Heat, while if the palms are hotter than
the forehead, this generally indicates interior Heat.
Box 51.16
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of skin.
 
BOX 51.16
 
   
 
PALPATION OF SKIN
1249
• 
 
Hot feeling: Heat
• 
 
Cold feeling: Cold or Yang deficiency
• 
 
Moist skin (from sweat): Yang deficiency or Heat
• 
 
Moist and greasy skin: Dampness or Phlegm
• 
 
Dry skin: Blood or Yin deficiency (or severe Blood
stasis)
• 
 
Rough skin: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Rough, dry and scaly skin: Blood deficient and dry,
Spleen deficiency
• 
 
Swollen skin with indentation on pressure: oedema
from Yang deficiency
• 
 
Swollen without indentation on pressure: Qi
stagnation or Blood stasis
Forearm Diagnosis
Diagnosis by palpating the palmar surface of the forearm between
the elbow and the wrist crease was described in 
Chapter 74
 
of the
‘Spiritual Axis’, which says: ‘
 
The rapid or slow, large or small and
slippery or rough condition of the skin of the forearm, as well as the
firmness of the muscles, reflects the location of the disease
 
.’
 
3
 
This
quotation refers to palpation of the palmar surface of the forearm.
‘Rapid or slow’ refers to how the hand glides over the patient’s
skin, that is ‘rapid’ means that the patient’s skin is smooth and the
practitioner’s hand glides easily and ‘slow’ means that the patient’s
skin is rough and the practitioner’s hand does not glide easily.
‘Large or small’ refers to the size of the muscles of this part of the
arm and ‘slippery or rough’ refers to the texture of the skin of the
forearm.
The same chapter of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says:
When the skin of the forearm is slippery and moist, it indicates
invasion of Wind; if it is rough, it indicates Wind Painful
Obstruction Syndrome; if it is like fish scales, it indicates
Phlegm-Fluids; if it feels hot and the pulse is Full, it indicates a
Heat disease; if the skin is cold and the pulse is small, it
1250
indicates diarrhoea and deficiency of Qi; if the skin is extremely
hot and then becomes cold, it indicates combined Heat and
Cold; if the skin feels cold but becomes gradually hotter on
palpation, it also indicates combined Heat and Cold.
 
4
In other words, the texture of the skin of the inner surface of the
forearm reflects invasions of external Wind if it feels slightly moist,
Blood deficiency if it feels dry, Wind Painful Obstruction syndrome
if it feels rough and severe Spleen deficiency with Phlegm if it 
feels
rough and coarse like fish scales. In addition to this, the
temperature of the skin of the inner forearm reflects conditions of
Heat (particularly of the Intestines) if it feels hot or conditions of
Cold (particularly of the Intestines) if it feels cold.
The same chapter of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ describes the
correspondences between the areas of the forearm and the
Internal Organs; these are summarized in 
Box 51.17
 
.
 
BOX 51.17
 
   
 
PALPATION OF THE
FOREARM (
Chapter 74
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’)
• 
 
Hot elbow: Heat above the waist
• 
 
Hot hand: Heat below the waist
• 
 
Hot inner flexure of the elbow: Heat in the chest
• 
 
Hot lateral side of the elbow: Heat in the upper back
• 
 
Hot inner aspect of the arm: Heat in the abdomen
• 
 
Hot 3–4 cun below the lateral side of the elbow:
worms in the Intestines
• 
 
Hot palm: Heat in the abdomen
• 
 
Cold palm: Cold in the abdomen
• 
 
Bluish blood vessels on thenar eminence: Cold in the
Stomach
The ‘Detailed Discussion of the Essence of Pulse Diagnosis’ (
Mai
Yao Jing Wei Lun
 
) developed the above topography of the forearm
from 
Chapter 74
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ into a detailed map of
correspondence between areas of the inner forearm and parts of
1251
the body (
Fig. 51.3
 
).
 
5
FIG. 51.3
 
Correspondence between areas of the inner forearm and
parts of the body
Besides palpation, the skin of the inner aspect of the forearm
should be observed for slackness, tightness, moistness, dryness,
protrusion and shrinking. If the inner aspect of the forearm looks
slack and loose, it indicates Heat; if it is tight, this indicates Cold.
If the forearm is moist this indicates Wind invasion; if it is dry it
indicates Blood or Yin deficiency. If the forearm skin seems to be
protruding and sticking out this indicates a Full condition; if it
looks shrinking and withered it indicates an Empty condition.
Palpation Of Temples In Children
In babies under 6 months, palpation of the temples is used for
diagnosis. The area to palpate is that between the end of the
eyebrow and the temple hairline (
Fig. 51.4
 
).
1252
FIG. 51.4
 
Temple palpation in babies
This area is palpated by gently resting the index, middle and
ring fingers between the end of the eyebrow and the temporal
hairline with the ring finger nearest the end of the eyebrow. The
right hand should be used to feel the left side of the child’s temple
while the left hand should be used to feel the right side. If this
area feels hot under all three fingers, this indicates an external
invasion of Wind; if it feels cold under all three fingers, this
indicates an external invasion of Wind-Cold or Accumulation
Disorder from stagnation in the digestive system. If it feels hot
under the index and middle fingers, this indicates Heat above and
Cold below. If it feels hot under the middle and ring fingers, this
indicates Heat from fright. If it feels hot under the index finger
only, this indicates Accumulation Disorder, stagnation of Qi in the
chest or breast-feeding problems. Of course, a hot feeling in this
area also corresponds to the objective feeling of heat called 
fa re
 
,
which may or may not correspond to an actual fever.
Finally, the temperature of this area of the baby’s forehead
should be compared with that of the palms. If the palms are hotter
than the temples, this indicates Empty-Heat; if the temples are
hotter than the palms, this indicates Full Heat.
Box 51.18
 
summarizes findings on temple palpation in babies.
 
BOX 51.18
 
   
 
TEMPLE PALPATION IN
BABIES
• 
 
Hot under three fingers: external invasion of Wind-
Heat
• 
 
Cold under three fingers: external invasion of Wind-
1253
Cold or Accumulation Disorder
• 
 
Hot under index and middle fingers: Heat above, Cold
below
• 
 
Hot under middle and ring fingers: Heat from fright
• 
 
Hot under the index finger only: Accumulation
Disorder, stagnation of Qi in the chest or breast-feeding
problems
• 
 
Temples hotter than palms: Full Heat
• 
 
Palms hotter than temples: Empty Heat
PALPATION OF HANDS AND FEET
Temperature
Palpation of the hands and feet, particularly in regard to their
temperature, is important to diagnose conditions of Heat and
Cold. The most common cause of cold hands and cold feet is Yang
deficiency. Lung- or Heart-Yang deficiency, or both, will cause
coldness of the hands only. Kidney-Yang deficiency will cause
coldness of the feet; if associated with Spleen-Yang deficiency, the
hands may be cold as well. Stomach-Yang deficiency may cause
coldness of both hands and feet. With Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency a particular feature is that not only the hands and feet
but the whole limbs are cold.
In women, cold hands and feet may also be caused by Blood
deficiency. Heart-Blood deficiency may cause cold hands, whereas
Liver-Blood deficiency may cause cold feet.
Stagnation of Liver-Qi may cause coldness of the hands and feet
but particularly of the fingers and toes. In this case, the cold
feeling is due not to a Yang deficiency but to Qi that is stagnant
being unable to reach the extremities.
 
In cold hands and feet from Liver-Qi stagnation, it is
the fingers and toes particularly that are cold.
1254
There are other less common causes of cold hands and feet. One
is Phlegm in the Interior, which may obstruct the circulation of Qi
to the limbs and cause cold hands; this may happen also in the
case of Phlegm-Heat giving rise to contradictory hot and cold
symptoms. Another less common situation of cold hands and feet
is when there is a very pronounced and intense Heat in the
Interior obstructing the circulation of Qi so that it cannot warm
the hands and feet; this condition will also give rise to
contradictory hot and cold symptoms. An example of this situation
is the condition of Heat in the Pericardium at the Nutritive-Qi level
within the Four Levels, which is characterized by symptoms and
signs of intense Heat (i.e. dark-Red tongue without coating, fever
at night, mental restlessness, etc.) but cold hands.
Box 51.19
 
summarizes the causes of cold hands and feet.
 
BOX 51.19
 
   
 
COLD HANDS AND FEET
Common causes
• 
 
Cold hands: Lung/Heart-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Cold feet: Kidney-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Cold of whole limbs: Spleen- and Kidney-Yang
deficiency
• 
 
Cold hands and feet: Stomach-Yang deficiency,
Kidney- with Spleen-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Cold hands and feet in women: Blood deficiency
• 
 
Cold hands in women: Heart-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Cold feet in women: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Cold fingers and toes: Liver-Qi stagnation
Less common cause
• 
 
Cold hands and feet: Phlegm or Interior Heat
obstructing circulation of Qi
• 
 
Contradictory hot and cold symptoms: Phlegm-Heat
or intense interior Heat
Palpation And Comparison Of Dorsum And
1255
Palm
When palpating the hands to feel their temperature, we should
distinguish between the dorsum and the palm of the hand: a hot
dorsum reflects more conditions of Full-Heat, whereas a hot palm
reflects more conditions of Empty-Heat, though not exclusively so.
 
Hot dorsum of the hand indicates Full-Heat; a hot palm
usually indicates Empty-Heat.
In the context of exterior invasions of Wind, palpation of the
dorsum of the hands is important because it confirms the exterior
nature of the condition. In fact, in exterior invasions of Wind
(whether Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat) there is the characteristic
contradiction between the patient’s subjective sensation of cold
(‘aversion to cold’) or even shivering and the objective hot feeling
of the dorsum of the hands on palpation. The Chinese term 
fa re
 
,
which is often translated as ‘fever’ in the context of exterior
invasions of Wind, actually refers precisely to this (i.e. the 
objective
hot feeling of the dorsum of the hands and forehead on palpation);
the patient may or may not have an actual fever.
Therefore, the comparison between the temperature of the
dorsum and the palms of the hands has two interpretations: on the
one hand, it helps to distinguish Full- from Empty-Heat; on the
other, in the context of acute diseases it confirms their exterior
nature.
Chapter 74
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ relates the temperature of the
palm of the hand to the condition of the Intestines: if the palm is
hot, this indicates Heat in the Intestines, whereas if cold it
indicates Cold in the Intestines.
 
6
Palpation Of Feet And Hands In Children
In children, conditions of Heat are normally reflected on the soles
of the feet, which become hot, whereas conditions of Cold are
normally reflected on the dorsum of the foot and on the leg, which
become cold. Also in children, cold tips of the fingers may indicate
1256
shock or fright, whereas if the middle section of the fingers is hot
this indicates an external invasion of Wind.
Palpation Of The Nails
Palpation of the hands should include pressing of the nails. When
a fingernail is pressed, a white discoloration appears. Under
normal conditions, the nail should resume its normal pinky colour
as soon as the pressure is released. If the resumption of the
normal pinky colour occurs slowly, this indicates either Blood
deficiency or Blood stasis.
PALPATION OF ACUPUNCTURE
POINTS
Palpation of acupuncture points is aimed primarily at checking for
tenderness. If a point is very tender on even superficial pressure,
this indicates a Full condition of that channel or local stagnation. If
pressure on the point relieves a particular pain, this indicates an
Empty condition of that channel. If pressure of the point initially
relieves a particular pain but then causes a discomfort, this
indicates a condition of mixed Deficiency and Excess.
Any acupuncture point may be used diagnostically, and indeed
the 
Ah Shi
 
points may be used as well. However, some points have
a particular diagnostic significance; these are the Front Collecting
(
Mu
 
) points, the Back Transporting (
Shu
 
) points and the Source
(
Yuan
 
) points.
Front Collecting (
Mu
 
) Points
With a single exception, the Front Collecting points are all located
on the chest and abdomen. The Chinese character 
Mu
 
literally
means to ‘raise, collect, enlist, recruit’. In this context, it has the
meaning of collecting, that is, these are the points where the Qi of
the relevant organs collects or gathers. These points are frequently
used in palpation diagnosis because they easily become tender on
palpation or even spontaneously when the relevant organ is
diseased. They are used diagnostically particularly, but not
1257
exclusively, in acute conditions. For example, the point LU-1
Zhongfu will be tender in acute lung diseases, such as bronchitis;
however, the same point may also be tender in chronic asthma.
The Front-Collecting points are listed in 
Box 51.20
 
.
 
BOX 51.20
 
   
 
FRONT COLLECTING
POINTS
• 
 
Lungs: LU-1 Zhongfu
• 
 
Large Intestine: ST-25 Tianshu
• 
 
Stomach: Ren-12 Zhongwan
• 
 
Spleen: Liv-13 Zhangmen
• 
 
Heart: Ren-14 Juque
• 
 
Small Intestine: Ren-4 Guanyuan
• 
 
Bladder: Ren-3 Zhongji
• 
 
Kidneys: GB-25 Jingmen
• 
 
Pericardium: Ren-17 Shanzhong
• 
 
Triple Burner: Ren-5 Shimen
• 
 
Gall-Bladder: GB-24 Riyue
• 
 
Liver: LIV-14 Qimen
LU-1 Zhongfu
This point is particularly useful to diagnose conditions of
Emptiness or Fullness of the Lung in interior diseases, such as
acute or chronic bronchitis, asthma and emphysema. LU-2
Yunmen is also frequently tender on palpation in the same
conditions.
ST-25 Tianshu
This point is a very important point in abdominal diagnosis
because it readily reflects Full or Empty conditions not only of the
Large Intestine, of which it is the Front Collecting point, but also
of the Small Intestine. ST-25 is also often the centre of stagnation
of Qi or Blood stasis in the Intestines, in which case the abdomen
feels distended on palpation. This point is also one where
Dampness in the Intestines frequently accumulates, in which case
it will feel hard on palpation.
1258
Ren-12 Zhongwan
This point is an extremely important point which should always be
palpated because it reflects Full or Empty conditions of the
Stomach. A distended feeling on palpation indicates stagnation of
Qi, a hard feeling on palpation indicates Dampness or retention of
food, whereas if the point feels very soft on palpation and the hand
sinks down easily this indicates a condition of deficiency of the
Stomach. When palpating Ren-12, other associated points should
be palpated because they all reflect the state of the Stomach; these
points are ST-20 Chengman, KI-17 Shangqu and ST-21 Liangmen.
LIV-13 Zhangmen
This point reflects Full and Empty conditions of the Spleen and
one can frequently feel a feeling of distension on palpation of this
point, which indicates stagnation of Qi in the Spleen. When
palpating LIV-13, other associated points indicating the state of the
Spleen should also be palpated and especially KI-18 Shiguan, Ren-
9 Shuifen and ST-21 Liangmen.
Ren-14 Juque
This point is very important to palpate because it readily reflects
Full and Empty conditions of the Heart, especially when caused by
emotional problems. The consistency and feeling of the area
around this point should be compared and contrasted with that of
the lower abdomen around Ren-6 Qihai: the area around Ren-14
should feel relatively soft compared with the area around Ren-6,
which should not be hard but should be harder than Ren-14. When
the area around this point feels distended or hard, it usually
indicates stagnation of Qi affecting not only the Heart but often
the Lungs and Stomach as well, and generally caused by emotional
problems. If the area around Ren-14 feels too soft and the hand
sinks easily this indicates a deficiency condition of the Heart.
When palpating Ren-14, we should also always palpate Ren-15
Jiuwei because, although it is not the Front Collecting point of the
Heart, it very much functions as one and palpation of this point
therefore has the same diagnostic significance as that of Ren-14.
Ren-4 Guanyuan
1259
This point indicates Full or Empty conditions of the Small
Intestine but in my experience this is a secondary aspect of its
palpation. I feel that the condition of the Small Intestine is also
reflected by palpation of other points such as ST-25 Tianshu, ST-27
Daju, ST-28 Shuidao and ST-29 Guilai. By contrast, palpation of
Ren-4 Guanyuan is important to show Full or Empty conditions of
the Uterus and of the Penetrating and Directing Vessels. If this
point feels distended on palpation this indicates stagnation of Qi
in the Uterus, if it feels hard on palpation it indicates retention of
Dampness in the Uterus, and if it feels hard with a sensation of a
mass it indicates Blood stasis 
in the Uterus. If this point feels very
soft and the hand sinks easily, it indicates a condition of deficiency
of the Uterus and of the Penetrating and Directing Vessels (this
finding is common in multiparous women).
Ren-3 Zhongji
This point readily reflects Full or Empty conditions of the Bladder
on palpation. However, palpation of this point also reflects the
condition of the Liver channel, especially in urinary conditions. For
example, if this point feels distended on palpation, it indicates
stagnation of Qi, not only in the Bladder, but also in the Liver
channel, usually causing urinary problems; if this point feels hard
on palpation it indicates retention of Dampness in the Bladder or
in the Liver channel, or both.
GB-25 Jingmen
This point reflects diseases of the Kidney organ; if it is tender on
palpation, this may indicate the presence of a kidney infection.
Ren-17 Shanzhong
This point indicates Full and Empty conditions of the Pericardium
according to the same general principles, depending on whether it
feels hard or soft on palpation. However, to determine conditions
of the Heart and Pericardium, palpation of Ren-14 Juque and Ren-
15 Jiuwei is more important.
Ren-5 Shimen
This point reflects the condition of the Lower Burner and
1260
particularly Small Intestine, Bladder, Uterus and Kidneys.
Hardness here indicates a Full condition of one of these organs,
while a softness indicates a deficiency of one of these organs but
also of the Original Qi (
Yuan Qi
 
).
GB-24 Riyue
This point indicates the state of the Gall-Bladder. A hardness at
this point indicates Dampness in the Gall-Bladder while a softness
indicates Gall-Bladder Qi deficiency.
LIV-14 Qimen
This point reflects the condition of the Liver. A hardness at this
point and tenderness on palpation indicate a Full condition of the
Liver (Qi stagnation, Blood stasis, Dampness). A softness on
palpation indicates Liver-Blood deficiency.
Back Transporting (
Bei Shu
 
) Points
The Back Transporting points are all located on the Bladder
channel on the back and may also be used diagnostically. The same
principles that apply to Front Collecting points apply to these
points, that is, if they are tender on palpation this indicates a Full
condition of the relevant organ, whereas if palpation relieves a
particular pain it indicates an Empty condition of that organ. A
particular diagnostic significance of the palpation of these points
is that they reflect specifically a condition of the relevant Internal
Organ as opposed to its channel. For example, tenderness on BL-18
Ganshu may indicate a Full condition of the Liver.
The Back Transporting points are listed in 
Box 51.21
 
.
 
BOX 51.21
 
   
 
BACK TRANSPORTING
POINTS
• 
 
Lungs: BL-13 Feishu
• 
 
Pericardium: BL-14 Jueyinshu
• 
 
Heart: BL-15 Xinshu
• 
 
Liver: BL-18 Ganshu
• 
 
Gall-Bladder: BL-19 Danshu
• 
 
Spleen: BL-20 Pishu
• 
 
Stomach: BL-21 Weishu
1261
• 
 
Triple Burner: BL-22 Sanjiaoshu
• 
 
Kidneys: BL-23 Shenshu
• 
 
Large Intestine: BL-25 Dachangshu
• 
 
Small Intestine: BL-27 Xiaochangshu
• 
 
Bladder: BL-28 Pangguangshu
Source (
Yuan
 
) Points
The diagnostic use of the Source points is described in 
Chapter 1
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’, which says: ‘
 
If the 5 Yin organs are diseased,
abnormal reactions will appear at the 12 Source points. If we know
the correspondence of Source points to the relevant Yin organ, we
can diagnose when a Yin organ is diseased.
 
’
 
7
 
This statement clearly
indicates that the Source points have a relation-ship with the
Original Qi and that changes on the skin over the Source points or
tenderness on palpation indicate abnormalities in the relevant Yin
organ. It should be noted that 
Chapter 1
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ lists
Source points only for the Yin organs (
Box 51.22
 
).
 
BOX 51.22
 
   
 
SOURCE POINTS FOR THE
YIN ORGANS
• 
 
Lungs: LU-9 Taiyuan
• 
 
Heart: PE-7 Daling
• 
 
Spleen: SP-3 Taibai
• 
 
Liver: LIV-3 Taichong
• 
 
Kidneys: KI-3 Taixi
This makes a total of 10 points (each point being bilateral); the
other two source points listed in that chapter are Ren-15 Jiuwei for
Fat tissues, and Ren-6 Qihai for the Membranes.
NOTES
1. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
1262
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:75 First published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:146 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 133
4. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 133
5. 
Cited in Tao, Deng Tie. Practical Chinese Diagnosis (
Shi
Yong Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Shanghai:
Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1988; 167.
6. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 133
7. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 3
1263
CHAPTER 52
 
PALPATION OF
CHANNELS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CONNECTING CHANNELS
MUSCLE CHANNELS
PALPATION OF THE CHANNELS IN PAINFUL OBSTRUCTION
SYNDROME (
Bi
 
)
PALPATION OF CHANNELS
Lung channel
Large Intestine channel
Stomach channel
Spleen channel
Heart channel
Small Intestine channel
Bladder channel
Kidney channel
Pericardium channel
1264
Triple Burner channel
Gall-Bladder channel
Liver channel
INTRODUCTION
Besides palpating specific points with a particular diagnostic
significance (as described in the previous chapter), palpation
diagnosis must include also palpation of the channels. Before
discussing the palpation of channels proper, we must discuss the
energetic significance of the secondary channels, and in particular
the Connecting (
Luo
 
) channels and the Muscle (
Jing Jin
 
) channels:
these are the two secondary channels that are mostly involved in
palpation. The other secondary channels, the Divergent (
Jing Bie
 
)
channels, are not involved in palpation because they lie at a deep
level, deeper than the Main channels.
CONNECTING CHANNELS
The Connecting channels are called 
Luo Mai
 
: 
Luo
 
implies the
meaning of ‘network’. (The Main channels are called 
Jing Mai
 
, and
Jing
 
implies the meaning of ‘line’, ‘route’, ‘way’.) 
Chapter 17
 
of the
‘Spiritual Axis’ confirms that the Connecting channels are
‘horizontal’ or ‘crosswise’: ‘
 
The Main channels are in the Interior,
their branches are horizontal [or crosswise] forming the Luo
channels
 
’.
 
1
The Connecting channels are more superficial than the Main
channels and they run in all directions, horizontally rather than
vertically. In particular, they fill the space between skin and
muscles (i.e. the 
Cou Li
 
space). The components of each channel
system correspond to different energetic layers pertaining to that
channel. For example, if we take the Lung channel, the most
superficial part of it is the skin overlying the channel pathway;
below that, there is the 
space between skin and muscles
 
or 
Li
 
space,
that is, the space between the skin and muscles where the
1265
Superficial Connecting 
channels course; below that, the
Connecting channel proper fills the space between the muscles
and sinews: below that, there is the Lung Main channel and below
that, the Lung Deep Connecting channel (
Fig. 52.1
 
). It is
important to visualize the Connecting channels not as lines but as
spaces filled by channels.
FIG. 52.1
 
Energetic layers of a channel (Lung)
Thus, the Connecting channels occupy the space between the
Main channels and the skin; however, within this space, there are
also degrees of depth. On the superficial layers just below the skin
there are smaller Connecting channels called Minute and
Superficial Connecting channels.
The main branches of the Connecting channels are called 
Bie
 
,
that is, ‘divergent’ (same word as that used for Divergent
channels). The Minute Connecting channels are called 
Sun
 
,
whereas the Superficial ones are called are called 
Fu
 
.
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: ‘
 
The Main channels are in
the Interior, their branches are horizontal [or crosswise] forming
the Luo channels: branching out from these are the Minute Luo
 
’.
 
2
Chapter 10
 
of the same book says: ‘
 
The more superficial branches
of the channels which can be seen are the Luo channels
 
’.
 
3
 
Chapter
58
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ states: ‘
The Minute Luo [Sun Luo]
communicate with the 365 points
 
’.
 
4
However, the Connecting channels have also a deeper layer
beyond the Main channels: these can be called the Deep
1266
Connecting channels and they are connected to the blood vessels
and Blood in general.
The 12 Main channels are situated between the Yang and Yin
Connecting channels. It is through the Yin and Yang Connecting
channels that Nutritive and Defensive Qi and Qi and Blood of the
main channels spread in all directions, permeate and irrigate the
Internal Organs. It is also through the Connecting channels that
the essence of the Internal Organs is transported to the Main
channels and, through them, to the whole body.
The Connecting channels cannot penetrate the big joints of the
body (as do the Main channels) and they are therefore restricted to
the spaces in between the deep pathway of the Main channels and
the surface of the body. The Connecting channels also fill the
spaces and ‘cavities’ of the body, which are all part of the Triple
Burner. This means that most of the stagnation in the body
actually occurs in the Connecting channels because they are
‘constricted’ in these spaces (as they cannot course through the
large joints) and because they form like a net which easily ‘catches’
pathogenic factors or in which Qi or Blood, or both, become
stagnant. 
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says:
The Luo channels cannot course through the large joints; in
order to [enter and] exit they must move by alternate routes.
They then enter and come together again under the skin and
therefore they can be seen from the outside. To needle the Luo
channel one must needle above the accumulation where Blood
is concentrated. Even if there is no blood accumulation, one
must prick to cause bleeding quickly to drain the pathogenic
factors out: if this is not done, Bi syndrome may develop.
 
5
Palpation
Palpation of the limbs involves essentially palpation of the
Connecting channels and especially the Superficial Connecting
channels and the Connecting channels proper. Generally speaking,
the more distal the point, the more it reflects the state of the
Connecting channels, whereas the more proximal the point, the
more it reflects the state of the Main channels. For example,
1267
palpation of the forearm from LU-10 to LU-3 and slightly beyond
reflects the state of the Lung Connecting channel portion;
palpation in the area of 
LU-2 and LU-1 reflects more the state of
the Lung Main channel (and the organ itself).
Palpation should include the following techniques.
Touching
Touching the skin reveals its temperature and moisture and
reflects the state of the Superficial Connecting channels. A hot
sensation indicates Heat of the Superficial Connecting channel; a
cold sensation indicates Cold of that particular channel. Dryness
of the skin indicates lack of Body Fluids in the Superficial
Connecting channels (related to Lungs and Spleen), whereas
excessive sweating indicates a weak state of the space between
skin and muscles (related to Lung-Qi deficiency).
Stroking
Stroking the skin reveals the texture and firmness of the skin and
flesh and reflects the state of the Connecting channels. A flaccid
feel indicates a weakness of the Connecting channel of the
particular channel palpated; a hardness indicates stagnation there.
Pressing
Pressing the muscles reveals the firmness of the muscles and
sinews and possible lumps or masses. Stiffness and hardness of
the layers below the flesh of the limb indicate a Full condition of
the Connecting channels (stagnation of Qi or Blood, or both).
Flaccidity indicates a condition of Emptiness of the Connecting
channel.
MUSCLE CHANNELS
The Muscle channels are called 
Jing Jin
 
, which could be translated
as ‘channel-like muscles’ or ‘muscles of the channels’. They are
discussed in 
Chapter 13
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’.
Characteristics
1268
The Muscle channels have the following characteristics:
 
• 
 
they are on the surface of the body
• 
 
they do not connect with the Internal Organs
• 
 
they all originate at the extremities
• 
 
they broadly follow the course of the Main channel
(with exceptions, e.g. the Bladder Muscle channel)
• 
 
they follow the contours of the major muscles
overlying the Main channels.
Functions
 
• 
 
They protect the body from trauma.
• 
 
They sustain the body in its erect position.
• 
 
They maintain the integrity of the body by connecting
the ‘100 bones’.
• 
 
They govern the movement of joints.
• 
 
They allow movement of the body.
• 
 
They contribute to the integration of the surface of
the body with the Interior.
• 
 
They contribute to the integration and connection
within the Yang and within the Yin channels (i.e. the
connections between Greater-Yang, Bright-Yang and
Lesser-Yang channels and those between Greater-Yin,
Lesser-Yin and Terminal-Yin channels).
Palpation
Palpation of the Muscle channels is done relatively firmly and it
reveals the consistency of the muscles. A hard and stiff feel on
palpation indicates either stagnation of Qi or Cold in the Muscle
channels, whereas a flaccid feel indicates a deficiency of Qi or
Blood, or both, in the Muscle channels.
The pathology of Muscle channels is essentially related only to
invasion of external pathogenic factors or trauma.
1269
PALPATION OF THE CHANNELS IN
PAINFUL OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME
(
BI
 
)
Palpation of points along the channel is essential in the treatment
of Painful Obstruction Syndrome; this consists in the palpation not
only of actual acupuncture points but also of Ah Shi points.
Therefore, in order to find the Ah Shi points, the whole channel
needs to be palpated.
The choice of points in the treatment of Painful Obstruction
Syndrome is based primarily on one or more distal points of the
affected channel (which are usually needled with reducing or even
method) and on several local points according to tenderness on
palpation. Palpating the Ah Shi points serves two purposes: in
diagnosis, it allows us to identify the affected channel precisely; in
treatment, it allows us to treat the reactive points (because their
tenderness indicates the points of local stagnation).
Identifying the affected channel through palpation is absolutely
essential for the choice of both distal and local points. For
example, in shoulder problems, one must clearly identify the
channel involved, which may be Small Intestine, Triple Burner,
Large Intestine or Lung channel.
PALPATION OF CHANNELS
Each channel has specific areas that have a particular diagnostic
significance on palpation. The following is a discussion of these
areas for each channel.
For each channel, two aspects of palpation are discussed, that is
palpation of a blood vessel overlying the channel and palpation of
the skin overlying the channel. For palpation of the skin, three
aspects are discussed, that is, temperature, texture and tenderness.
Lung Channel
Apart from the palpation of points along the channels, the
palpation of the Front position of the radial artery on the right side
1270
itself is a form of palpation of the Lung channel.
Palpation of blood vessel
The axillary artery can be palpated along the channel in the region
extending from LU-1 Zhongfu to LU-4 Xiabai. If this feels
superficial on palpation, it indicates an external invasion of Wind
in the Lung-Defensive-Qi portion; if it feels deep this indicates an
internal Lung problem. If it is rapid, this indicates Lung-Heat; if it
is slow, this denotes Damp-Phlegm or Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs.
If the artery pulsation feels empty this indicates Lung-Qi
deficiency; if it feels full, this denotes a Full condition of the Lung
such as Phlegm in the Lungs.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
Besides feeling the pulsation of the axillary artery, one should
palpate the skin overlying the Lung channel, again in the area
extending from LU-1 Zhongfu to LU-4 Xiabai. If the skin feels hot,
this indicates Lung-Heat, whereas if it feels cold, this indicates
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs.
Texture
If the skin feels flaccid, it denotes Lung-Qi deficiency. If it feels
rough and stiff, this indicates a Full condition of the Lungs.
Tenderness
Tenderness on palpation indicates stagnation of Qi and Blood in
the Lung channel. If the tenderness is elicited with a light pressure
this indicates stagnation in the superficial layers at the level of the
Lung Connecting channel energetic layer; if it is elicited with a
deep pressure this indicates stagnation at the deep energetic
layers of the channel, that is, the sinew and bone energetic layers.
Box 52.1
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of the Lung
channel.
 
BOX 52.1
 
   
 
PALPATION OF LUNG
CHANNEL
1271
Palpation of blood vessel: Axillary artery from
LU-1 Zhongfu to LU-4 Xiabai
• 
 
Superficial: external invasion of Wind in the Lungs’
Defensive-Qi portion
• 
 
Deep: internal Lung problem
• 
 
Rapid: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Slow: Damp-Phlegm or Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Empty: Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Full: Full condition of the Lung
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Lung-Heat
• 
 
Cold: Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Rough and stiff: Full condition of the Lungs
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness with a light pressure: stagnation in the
superficial layers of the Lung Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness with a deep pressure: stagnation at the
deep energetic layers of the channel, i.e. sinew and bone
energetic layers
Large Intestine Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Large Intestine channel is
the area from LI-4 Hegu to LI-5 Yangxi and especially the latter
where the radial artery can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of LI-5 Yangxi is superficial and large,
this indicates conditions such as facial paralysis, tooth abscess or
external Wind-Heat; if it is deep it may indicate an intestinal
pathology such as abdominal pain, constipation or diarrhoea. If it
is rapid this denotes a Heat condition of the Large Intestine 
and if
1272
it is slow a Cold condition. If the pulsation feels empty this
denotes an Empty condition of the Large Intestine, and if it feels
full a Full condition with stagnation and abdominal pain.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of LI-4 Hegu and LI-5 Yangxi feels hot, this
indicates a Heat condition of the channel often causing a tooth
abscess or tonsillitis. If it feels cold, this denotes a Cold condition.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Large Intestine with symptoms such as chronic
diarrhoea. If the skin feels rough and hard it denotes a Full
condition of the Large Intestine with symptoms such as Damp-
Heat diarrhoea.
Tenderness
If the area between LI-4 Hegu and LI-5 Yangxi is tender on a light
palpation, this indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting
channels (with symptoms such as facial tingling). If it is tender on
deep pressure, it indicates a stagnation in the Connectingchannels
proper, and possibly also the Deep Connecting channels, with
symptoms such as chronic tendinitis of the shoulder or elbow with
long-standing stagnation. If there is a spontaneous tenderness that
is alleviated by palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of the
channel, whereas if the tenderness is aggravated by palpation it
denotes a Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.2
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of the Large
Intestine channel
 
BOX 52.2
 
   
 
LARGE INTESTINE
CHANNEL PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: from LI-4 Hegu to LI-
5 Yangxi
• 
 
Superficial and large: facial paralysis, tooth abscess or
1273
external Wind-Heat
• 
 
Deep: intestinal pathology
• 
 
Rapid: Heat
• 
 
Slow: Cold
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition
• 
 
Full: Full condition with stagnation and abdominal
pain
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat condition (teeth, tonsils)
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty (diarrhoea)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full (Damp-Heat diarrhoea)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tender on a light palpation: stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channels
• 
 
Tender on deep pressure: stagnation in the
Connecting channels proper and Deep Connecting
channels
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated by
palpation: Empty condition of the channel
• 
 
Tenderness aggravated by palpation: Full condition of
the channel
Stomach Channel
Palpation of blood vessel
The two areas with diagnostic significance are ST-42 Chongyang
and ST-9 Renying.
ST-42 Chongyang
The dorsal artery can be felt at this point. If the pulsation feels
superficial, this indicates problems of the Stomach channel such
as headache or sore throat; if it feels deep, it denotes problems of
1274
the Stomach organ with symptoms such as epigastric pain. If the
pulsation is rapid, this indicates Heat in the Stomach channel with
symptoms such as thirst and problems of the teeth or gums from
Heat; if it feels slow, it indicates Cold in the Stomach channel. If
the pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of the
Stomach with symptoms such as a dull epigastric pain; if it is full,
it indicates a Full condition of the Stomach with symptoms such as
epigastric pain from stagnation.
ST-9 Renying
The carotid artery can be felt at this point. This point is a Window
of Heaven point regulating the flow of Qi to and from the head. If
the carotid pulse feels full and rapid, this indicates a Full condition
with excess of Yang in the head; if it feels empty, this indicates an
Empty condition with a deficiency of Qi or Blood, or both, in the
head.
Palpation of skin
The area around ST-42 Chongyang is palpated.
Temperature
If the skin feels hot on palpation this indicates a condition of Heat
of the Stomach channel, which may be causing gum or breast
problems (in women); if the skin feels cold, it indicates a Cold
condition of the Stomach with symptoms such as dull epigastric
pain.
Texture
If the skin in the area of ST-42 Chongyang feels flaccid, this
indicates an Empty condition of the Stomach with symptoms such
as dull epigastric pain, if it feels rough and hard, it denotes a Full
condition of the Stomach, which may be causing a sharp epigastric
pain or a breast pathology (in women).
Tenderness
If the area is tender on light palpation, this indicates a stagnation
in the Superficial Connecting channels with symptoms such as
1275
facial paralysis; if it is tenderon deep pressure it indicates
stagnation of Qi or Blood, or both, in the Connecting channels
proper and Main channels, with symptoms such as chronic Painful
Obstruction Syndrome along the Stomach channel.
If there is tenderness that is alleviated by pressure, this
indicates an Empty condition of the channel; if it is aggravated by
pressure it indicates a Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.3
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of the stomach
channel.
 
BOX 52.3
 
   
 
STOMACH CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: ST-42 Chongyang
and ST-9 Renying
ST-42 Chongyang
• 
 
Superficial: Stomach channel problems (headache,
sore throat)
• 
 
Deep: problems of the Stomach organ (epigastric
pain)
• 
 
Rapid: Heat in the Stomach channel (thirst, problems
in gums and mouth)
• 
 
Slow: Cold in the Stomach channel
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition of the Stomach (dull
epigastric pain)
• 
 
Full: Full condition of the Stomach (dull pain from
stagnation)
ST-9 Renying
• 
 
Full and rapid: Full condition with excess of Yang in
the head
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition with a deficiency of Qi/Blood
in the head
Palpation of skin: around ST-42 Chongyang
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat of the Stomach channel (problems with
gums or breast in women)
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition of the Stomach (epigastrium)
Texture
1276
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition of the Stomach (pain in
epigastrium)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition of the Stomach (could
be sharp epigastric pain or breast pathology in women)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tender on light palpation: stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channels, with facial paralysis
• 
 
Tender on deep pressure: stagnation of Qi/Blood in
the Connecting channels proper and Main channels
with symptoms such as chronic Painful Obstruction
Syndrome along the Stomach channel
• 
 
Tenderness that is alleviated by pressure: Empty
condition of the channel
• 
 
Tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full condition of
the channel
Spleen Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Spleen channel is the area
from SP-11 Jimen to SP-12 Chongmen where the femoral artery can
felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of SP-11 Jimen to SP-12 Chongmen is
superficial and large, this indicates skin conditions such as
erysipelas; if it is deep it may indicate an intestinal pathology such
as abdominal pain or fullness. If it is rapid, this denotes a Heat
condition of the Spleen channel, and if it is slow a Cold condition
of the organ with symptoms such a diarrhoea from Cold. If the
pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of the
Spleen with symptoms such as lassitude, weakness and loose
stools; if it feels full, this denotes a Full condition with stagnation
and abdominal pain.
Palpation of skin
1277
Temperature
If the skin in the area of SP-11 Jinmen and SP-12 Chongmen feels
hot, this indicates a Heat condition of the channel often causing
erysipelas; if it feels cold, it denotes a Cold condition with
symptoms such as cold limbs.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Spleen with symptoms such as chronic diarrhoea;
if the skin feels rough and hard it denotes a Full condition of the
Spleen with symptoms such as Damp-Heat diarrhoea.
Tenderness
If the area between SP-11 Jinmen and SP-12 Chongmen is tender
on a light palpation, this indicates a stagnation in the Superficial
Connecting channels; if it is 
tender on deep pressure, it indicates a
stagnation in the Connecting channels proper and possibly also
Deep Connecting channels with symptoms such as chronic groin
pain. If there is a spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated by
palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of the channel,
whereas if the tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes a
Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.4
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of the Spleen
channel.
 
BOX 52.4
 
   
 
SPLEEN CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: from SP-11 Jimen to
SP-12 Chongmen
• 
 
Superficial and large: skin rashes
• 
 
Deep: intestinal pathology
• 
 
Rapid: Heat in Spleen channel
• 
 
Slow: Cold condition (diarrhoea)
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (loose stools, weakness,
tiredness)
• 
 
Full: stagnation in Intestines
1278
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat in channel
• 
 
Cold: Cold (limbs)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (diarrhoea)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (Damp-Heat
diarrhoea)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tender on light palpation: stagnation in Superficial
Connecting channels
• 
 
Tender on deep pressure: stagnation in Connecting
channel proper and Deep Connecting channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of channel
Heart Channel
The diagnostic areas for palpation on the Heart channel are HE-7
Shenmen, where the ulnar artery can be felt, and HE-1 Jiquan,
where the axillary artery can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of HE-7 Shenmen and HE-1 Jiquan is
superficial and large, this indicates conditions such as red eyes
from Heart-Heat or erysipelas; if it is deep it may indicate a
condition with palpitations and chest pain. If it is rapid, this
denotes a Heat condition of the Heart channel with symptoms
such as tongue ulcers, whereas if it is slow it denotes a Cold
condition such as Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome. If the
pulsation feels empty, it denotes an Empty condition of the Heart
with symptoms such as anxiety and poor memory, and if it feels
full a Full condition with symptoms such as mental restlessness.
1279
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of HE-7 Shenmen and HE-1 Jiquan feels hot,
this indicates a Heat condition of the channel often causing red
eyes, hot palms or erysipelas; if it feels cold it denotes a Cold
condition often causing chest pain.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Heart channel with symptoms such as contraction
of the little finger; if the skin feels rough and hard it denotes a Full
condition of the Heart channel such as Heart-Heat causing tongue
ulcers.
Tenderness
If the areas of HE-7 Shenmen and HE-1 Jiquan are tender on a light
palpation, this indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting
channels, whereas if it is tender on deep pressure it indicates a
stagnation in the Connecting channels proper and possibly also
Deep Connecting channels with symptoms such as chronic Chest
Painful Obstruction Syndrome. If there is a spontaneous
tenderness that is alleviated by palpation, this indicates an Empty
condition of the channel; if the tenderness is aggravated by
palpation it denotes a Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.5
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the Heart channel.
 
BOX 52.5
 
   
 
HEART CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: From HE-7 Shenmen
to HE-1 Jiquan
• 
 
Superficial and large: Heart-Heat (e.g. red eyes)
• 
 
Deep: palpitations and chest pain
• 
 
Rapid: Heat in Heart channel (e.g. tongue ulcers)
• 
 
Slow: Chest Painful Obstruction Syndrome
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (e.g. anxiety, poor memory)
• 
 
Full: Full condition (e.g. mental restlessness)
1280
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat (e.g. red eyes)
• 
 
Cold: Cold (e.g. chest pain)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition of channel (e.g. contraction
in little finger)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition of channel (e.g.
tongue ulcers)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of the channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of the channel
Small Intestine Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Small Intestine channel is
the area around SI-16 Tianchuang where the cervical artery can be
felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of SI-16 Tianchuang is superficial and
large, this indicates conditions such as headache from invasion of
external Wind; if it is deep it may indicate a urinary pathology such
as urinary retention. If it is rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of
the Small Intestine with symptoms such as burning on urination;
if it is slow, it indicates a Cold condition with symptoms such as
pale-frequent urination. If the pulsation feels empty, this denotes
an Empty condition of the Small Intestine with urin-ary symptoms,
and if it feels full a Full condition with stagnation and abdominal
1281
pain or urinary retention.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of SI-16 Tianchuang feels hot, this indicates
a Heat condition of the channel often causing tonsillitis or ear
infections; if it feels cold it denotes a Cold condition of the Small
Intestine with borborygmi and diarrhoea.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Small Intestine with symptoms such as frequent-
pale urination. If the skin feels rough and hard it denotes a Full
condition of the Small Intestine, often with symptoms such as stiff
and painful neck.
Tenderness
If the area around SI-16 Tianchuang is tender on a light palpation,
this indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels
(with symptoms such as numbness of the neck muscles), while if it
is tender on deep pressure it indicates a stagnation in the
Connecting channels proper and possibly also Deep Connecting
channels with symptoms such as chronic tendinitis of the shoulder
or stiff neck with longstanding stagnation. If there is a
spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated by palpation it indicates
an Empty condition of the channel, while if the tenderness is
aggravated by palpation it denotes a Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.6
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the Small
Intestine channel.
 
BOX 52.6
 
   
 
SMALL INTESTINE
CHANNEL PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around SI-16
Tianchuang
• 
 
Superficial and large: external Wind
• 
 
Deep: urinary pathology
1282
• 
 
Rapid: Heat with urinary symptoms
• 
 
Slow: Cold with urinary symptoms
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition with urinary symptoms
• 
 
Full: Full condition with abdominal pain and urinary
retention
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat in channel (e.g. tonsillitis, ear infection)
• 
 
Cold: Cold in organ (e.g. diarrhoea)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition with urinary symptoms
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition of channel (e.g. neck
numbness)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in
Superficial Connecting channel (e.g. numb neck
muscles)
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel (e.g. shoulder and neck stiffness)
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of channel
Bladder Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Bladder channel is the
area around BL-40 Weizhong where the popliteal artery can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of BL-40 Weizhong is superficial and
large, this indicates conditions such as headache and neck ache
from invasion of external Wind; if it is deep it may indicate a
urinary pathology such as scanty urination with oedema. If it is
1283
rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of the Bladder with symptoms
such as burning on urination, and if it is slow, it denotes a Cold
condition with symptoms such as frequent-pale urination. If the
pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of the
Bladder with symptoms such as urinary incontinence or enuresis,
and if it feels full, it denotes a Full condition with symptoms such
as urinary retention.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of BL-40 Weizhong feels hot, this indicates a
Heat condition of channel, which may cause skin eruptions along
the channel. If it feels cold it denotes a Cold condition with
symptoms such as cold and weak legs.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Bladder with symptoms such as backache from
Deficiency and weak legs; if the skin feels rough and hard it
denotes a Full condition of the Bladder with symptoms such as
urinary retention.
Tenderness
If the area around BL-40 Weizhong is tender on a light palpation,
this indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels
(with symptoms such as scalp tingling), while if it is tender on
deep pressure it indicates a stagnation in the Connecting channels
proper and possibly also the Deep Connecting channels with
symptoms such as chronic backache from longstanding
stagnation. If there is a spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated
by palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of the channel,
whereas if the tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes a
Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.7
 
summarizes the findings on palpation of the Bladder
channel.
 
BOX 52.7
 
   
 
BLADDER CHANNEL
1284
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around BL-40
Weizhong
• 
 
Superficial and large: external Wind
• 
 
Deep: urinary pathology
• 
 
Rapid: Heat (e.g. burning on urination)
• 
 
Slow: Cold (e.g. frequent urination)
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition of organ
• 
 
Full: Full condition of organ
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat condition of channel
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition of channel (e.g. cold and weak
legs)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (e.g. weak legs, backache)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (e.g. urinary
retention)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of channel
Kidney Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Kidney channel is the area
around KI-3 Taixi where the posterior tibial artery can be felt.
1285
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of KI-3 Taixi is superficial and large,
this indicates conditions such as headache and neck ache from
invasion of external Wind; if it is deep it may indicate a urinary
pathology such as scanty urination with oedema or gynaecological
problems. If it is rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of the
Kidneys with symptoms such as burning on urination, and if slow
a Cold condition with symptoms such as frequent-pale urination.
If the pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of
the Kidneys with symptoms such as urinary incontinence or
enuresis, and if it feels full a Full condition with symptoms such as
urinary retention.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of KI-3 Taixi feels hot, this indicates a Heat
condition of the channel which may cause skin eruptions along the
channel; if it feels cold it denotes a Cold condition with symptoms
such as feeling cold, backache and frequent-pale urination.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Kidney with symptoms such as backache from
Deficiency and weak legs; if the skin feels rough and hard it
denotes a Full condition of the Kidney with symptoms such as
urinary retention.
Tenderness
If the area around KI-3 Taixi is tender on a light palpation, this
indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels (with
symptoms such as scalp tingling), whereas if tender on deep
pressure, it indicates a stagnation in the Connecting channels
proper, and possibly also the Deep Connecting channels, with
symptoms such as chronic backache from long-standing
stagnation. If there is a spontaneous tendernessthat is alleviated
by palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of the channel,
1286
whereas if the tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes a
Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.8
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the Kidney
channel.
 
BOX 52.8
 
   
 
KIDNEY CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around KI-3
Taixi
• 
 
Superficial and large: external Wind
• 
 
Deep: urinary or gynaecological condition
• 
 
Rapid: Heat (urinary)
• 
 
Slow: Cold (urinary)
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (urinary)
• 
 
Full: Full condition (urinary)
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat condition of channel
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition of channel
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (back)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (urinary)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of channel
Pericardium Channel
1287
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Pericardium channel is
the area around PE-8 Laogong where the common palmar digital
artery can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of PE-8 Laogong is superficial and
large, this indicates conditions such as fullness of the chest; if it is
deep it may indicate chest pain from stagnation. If it is rapid, this
denotes a Heat condition of the Pericardium with symptoms such
as mental restlessness and hot chest, whereas if slow a Cold
condition with symptoms such as chest pain from Yang deficiency.
If the pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of
the Pericardium, with symptoms such as palpitations, insomnia
and an empty feeling of the chest, and if it feels full a Full
condition, with symptoms such as mental restlessness and manic
behaviour.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of PE-8 Laogong feels hot, this indicates a
Heat condition of channel, which may cause hot palms; if it feels
cold it denotes a Cold condition, with symptoms such as feeling of
cold and dull chest ache.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Pericardium, with symptoms such as an empty
feeling of the chest; if it feels rough and hard it denotes a Full
condition of the Pericardium, with symptoms such as chest pain.
Tenderness
If the area around PE-8 Laogong is tender on a light palpation, this
indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels (with
symptoms such as scalp tingling) whereas if tender on deep
pressure, it indicates a stagnation in the Connecting channels
proper, and possibly also Deep Connecting channels, with
1288
symptoms such as chest pain from long-standing stagnation. If
there is a spontaneous tenderness that is 
alleviated by palpation,
this indicates an Empty condition of the channel, whereas if the
tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes a Full condition
of the channel.
Box 52.9
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the Pericardium
channel.
 
BOX 52.9
 
   
 
PERICARDIUM CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around PE-8
Laogong
• 
 
Superficial and large: fullness of the chest
• 
 
Deep: chest pain from stagnation
• 
 
Rapid: Heat condition of Pericardium (e.g. mental
restlessness)
• 
 
Slow: chest pain from Yang deficiency
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (e.g. insomnia)
• 
 
Full: Full condition (e.g. mental restlessness, mania)
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat condition of channel (e.g. hot palms)
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition (e.g. dull chest ache)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (e.g. empty feeling in chest)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (e.g. chest pain)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of channel
1289
Triple Burner Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Triple Burner channel is
the area around TB-22 Heliao where the superficial temporal artery
can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of TB-22 Heliao is superficial and large,
this indicates conditions such as headache and neck ache from
invasion of external Wind; if it is deep it may indicate a urinary
pathology. If it is rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of the Triple
Burner with symptoms such as earache, and if it is slow a Cold
condition, with symptoms such as frequent-pale urination. If the
pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of the
Triple Burner, with symptoms such as urinary incontinence or
enuresis, and if it feels full a Full condition, with symptoms such
as fullness of the chest.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of TB-22 Heliao feels hot, this indicates a
Heat condition of channel, which may cause ear infections; if it
feels cold it denotes a Cold condition, with symptoms such as cold
and weak legs or a urinary pathology.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Triple Burner, with symptoms such as weak arms;
if the skin feels rough and hard it denotes a Full condition of the
Triple Burner, with symptoms such as red skin eruptions along the
channel.
Tenderness
If the area around TB-22 Heliao is tender on a light palpation, this
indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels (with
symptoms such as face tingling), while if tender on deep pressure
it indicates a stagnation in the Connecting channels proper, and
1290
possibly also Deep Connecting channels, with symptoms such as
chronic tendinitis of the shoulder from long-standing stagnation.
If there is spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated by palpation,
this indicates an Empty condition of the channel, while if the
tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes a Full condition
of the channel.
Box 52.10
 
Summarizes findings on palpation of the Triple Burner
channel.
 
BOX 52.10
 
   
 
TRIPLE BURNER CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around TB-22
Heliao
• 
 
Superficial and large: external Wind
• 
 
Deep: urinary pathology
• 
 
Rapid: Heat (e.g. earache)
• 
 
Slow: Cold (e.g. frequent urination)
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (e.g. urinary incontinence)
• 
 
Full: Full condition (e.g. chest fullness)
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat condition of channel
• 
 
Cold: Cold condition of channel
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (e.g. weak arms)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (e.g. eruptions along
channel)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in the
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of the channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of the channel
1291
Gall-Bladder Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Gall-Bladder channel is
the area around GB-2 Tinghui where the superficial temporal
artery can be felt.
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of GB-2 Tinghui is superficial and large,
this indicates conditions such as headache and neck ache from
invasion of external Wind; if it is deep it may indicate a Gall-
Bladder pathology, with symptoms such as hypochondrial pain. If
it is rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of the Gall-Bladder, with
symptoms such as earache or red eyes, and if slow a Cold
condition, with symptoms such as headache or watering eyes. If
the pulsation feels empty, this denotes an Empty condition of the
Gall-Bladder, with symptoms such as chronic leucorrhoea, and if it
feels full a Full condition, with symptoms such as earache.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of GB-2 Tinghui feels hot, this indicates a
Heat condition of channel, which may cause ear infections; if it
feels cold it denotes a Cold condition, with symptoms such as cold
and weak legs.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Gall-Bladder, with symptoms such as backache
from Deficiency and weak legs; if the skin feels rough and hard it
denotes a Full condition of the Gall-Bladder, with symptoms such
as hypochondrial pain.
Tenderness
If the area around GB-2 Tinghui is tender on a light palpation, this
indicates a stagnation in the Superficial Connecting channels (with
symptoms such as face and ear tingling), while if tender on deep
pressure it indicates a stagnation in the Connecting channels
1292
proper, and possibly also the Deep Connecting channels, with
symptoms such as chronic hip or knee pain from long-standing
stagnation. If there is a spontaneous tenderness that is alleviated
by palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of the channel,
whereas if aggravated by palpation it denotes a Full condition of
the channel.
Box 52.11
 
summarizes findings on palpation of the Gall-Bladder
channel.
 
BOX 52.11
 
   
 
GALL-BLADDER CHANNEL
PALPATION
Palpation of blood vessel: area around GB-2
Tinghui
• 
 
Superficial and large: external Wind
• 
 
Deep: hypochondrial pain
• 
 
Rapid: Heat (e.g. earache, red eyes)
• 
 
Slow: Cold (e.g. headache, watery eyes)
• 
 
Empty: Empty condition (e.g. vaginal discharge)
• 
 
Full: Full condition (e.g. earache)
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat (e.g. ear infection)
• 
 
Cold: Cold (e.g. cold/weak legs)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (e.g. backache, weak legs)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (e.g. hypochondrial
pain)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in the
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
Empty condition of the channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of the channel
1293
Liver Channel
The diagnostic area for palpation on the Liver channel is the area
around LIV-3 Taichong (where the dorsal metatarsal artery can be
felt), LIV-9 Yinbao and LIV-10 Wuli (where the femoral artery can
be felt).
Palpation of blood vessel
If the pulsation in the area of LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-9 Yinbao and
LIV-10 Wuli is superficial and large, this indicates conditions such
as headache and painful eyes; if it is deep it may indicate a Liver
pathology such as Liver-Qi stagnation, with symptoms of
abdominal pain. If it is 
rapid, this denotes a Heat condition of the
Liver, with symptoms such as headache, red eyes and epistaxis; if
slow it denotes a Cold condition, with symptoms such as headache
or watering eyes. If the pulsation feels empty, this denotes an
Empty condition of the Liver such as Liver-Blood deficiency, with
symptoms such as blurred vision and scanty periods; if it feels full,
it denotes a Full condition such as Liver-Qi stagnation, with
symptoms such as hypogastric distension and urinary problems.
Palpation of skin
Temperature
If the skin in the area of LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-9 Yinbao and LIV-10
Wuli feels hot, this indicates a Heat conditionof channel, which
may cause erysipelas or inflammation of the external genitalia; if it
feels cold it denotes a Cold condition, with symptoms such as cold
hypogastrium and external genitalia.
Texture
If the skin in the same area feels flaccid, this indicates an Empty
condition of the Liver, with symptoms such as numbness and
weakness of the legs; if it feels rough and hard it denotes a Full
condition of the Liver, with symptoms such as hypochondrial pain.
Tenderness
If the area around LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-9 Yinbao and LIV-10 Wuli is
1294
tender on light palpation, this indicates a stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channels (with symptoms such as genital
itching), whereas if tender on deep pressure, it indicates a
stagnation in the Connecting channels proper, and possibly also
Deep Connecting channels, with symptoms such as hypogastric
pain and urinary symptoms. If there is a spontaneous tenderness
that is alleviated by palpation, this indicates an Empty condition of
the channel; if the tenderness is aggravated by palpation it denotes
a Full condition of the channel.
Box 52.12
 
summarizes the findings on palpations of the Liver
channel.
 
BOX 52.12
 
   
 
LIVER CHANNEL
PATHOLOGY
Palpation of blood vessel: from LIV-3 Taichong
to LIV-10 Wuli
• 
 
Superficial and large: pain in head and eyes
• 
 
Deep: Liver-Qi stagnation
• 
 
Rapid: Liver-Heat (e.g. headache, red eyes)
• 
 
Slow: headache with watery eyes
• 
 
Empty: Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Full: Liver-Qi stagnation (e.g. urinary problems)
Palpation of skin
Temperature
• 
 
Hot: Heat in channel (e.g. inflammation of genitalia)
• 
 
Cold: Cold in channel (e.g. cold genitalia)
Texture
• 
 
Flaccid: Empty condition (e.g. numb/weak legs)
• 
 
Rough and hard: Full condition (e.g. hypochondrial
pain)
Tenderness
• 
 
Tenderness on light palpation: stagnation in the
Superficial Connecting channel
• 
 
Tenderness on deep pressure: stagnation in the
Connecting channel proper and Deep Connecting
channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness alleviated by pressure:
1295
Empty condition of the channel
• 
 
Spontaneous tenderness aggravated by pressure: Full
condition of the channel
NOTES
1. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:50 First published c. 100
BC
2. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 50.
3. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 37.
4. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:301 First
published c. 100 
BC
5. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 37
1296
PART 4
DIAGNOSIS BY
HEARING AND
SMELLING
1297
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
HEARING AND
SMELLING
 
Part contents
53. 
 
Diagnosis by hearing
54. 
 
Diagnosis by smelling
INTRODUCTION
Diagnosis by hearing and smelling is called 
Wen
 
in Chinese and,
interestingly, this character can mean both ‘to hear’ and ‘to smell’.
Diagnosis by these means has been an integral part of Chinese
medicine since early times. 
Chapter 5
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’
mentions hearing in the context of diagnosis in general: ‘
 
A good
diagnostician will observe the patient’s complexion and feel his
pulse to distinguish Yin from Yang; he will examine whether the
complexion is clear or turbid to identity the location of the disease;
he will listen to the patient’s panting and breathing and the
patient’s voice to diagnose the affliction.
 
’
 
1
In ancient times the Yin organs were correlated with the five
musical notes (the scale of Chinese music has five rather than
1298
seven notes) and the five sounds. These were:
 
• 
 
the Liver has the note 
jue
 
and the sound of shouting
• 
 
the Heart has the note 
zhi
 
and the sound of laughing
• 
 
the Spleen has the note 
gong
 
and the sound of singing
• 
 
the Lungs have the note 
shang
 
and the sound of
weeping
• 
 
the Kidneys have the note 
yu
 
and the sound of
groaning.
The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ mentions the sounds and smells in
several passages. 
Chapter 34
 
lists the colours, sounds, smells,
tastes and fluids of each Yin organ. The sounds and smells of each
Yin organ in this classic are listed as follows.
 
2
Organ
Sound
Smell
Liver
Shouting
Foul
Heart
Talking
Scorched
Spleen
Singing
Fragrant
Lungs
Weeping
Rotten
Kidneys
Groaning
Putrid
Chapter 49
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ says: ‘
 
The Heart
controls the sense of smell. When this enters the Heart itself the
smell is scorched, when it enters the Spleen it is fragrant, when it
enters the Liver it is foul, when it enters the Kidneys it is putrid,
when it enters the Lungs it is rotten.
 
’
 
3
 
It is interesting that this
passage relates the sense of smell to the Heart.
The same chapter of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ discusses the
sounds related to the Yin organs: ‘
 
The Lungs control the voice [or
sound]. When this enters the Liver the sound is shouting, when it
enters the Heart it is talking, when it enters the Spleen it is singing,
when it enters the Kidneys it is groaning, and when it enters the
Lung itself it is weeping.
 
’
 
4
 
Chapter 61
 
of the same classic says: ‘
 
By
hearing the five sounds we can diagnose the disease.
 
’
 
5
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ has an interesting
description of the voice of a patient suffering from Dampness: ‘
When the Centre [i.e. Middle Burner] suffers from fullness, the rising
Qi will cause fear and the voice [of the patient] sounds as if it were
1299
coming from the inside of a room [i.e. between walls] and this is due
to Dampness in the Centre.
 
’
 
6
 
The same passage then describes the
clinical significance of a weak voice and of incoherent speech: ‘
When the voice is feeble and interrupted Qi is depleted. If a person
cannot look after his personal hygiene [literally the clothes and
bedding are messy] and the speech is incoherent, it means that the
Mind is chaotic.
 
’
 
7
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:46 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:85 First published c. 
AD
 
100
3. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1979; 113.
4. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1979; 114.
5. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1979; 135.
6. 
Simple Questions, pp. 99–100.
7. 
Simple Questions, pp. 100.
1300
CHAPTER 53
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
HEARING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
VOICE
Normal voice
The voice and the Five Elements
Strength and quality of the voice
SPEECH
CRYING IN BABIES
BREATHING AND SIGHING
Breathing
Pathological breathing sounds
Sighing
COUGHING AND SNEEZING
Coughing
Sneezing
HICCUP
1301
BELCHING
VOMITING
INTRODUCTION
We may start using ‘hearing’ as an aid to diagnosis as soon as
patients begin to speak, or even when they telephone to make an
appointment. The sound of the voice gives us an immediate
indication of the state of patients’ Qi and, in particular, of their
Lung-Qi, which is directly reflected in the voice. The voice also
reflects the state of the Mind and Spirit: a quiet voice without force
and with a sad tone indicates that the Mind and Spirit are affected.
VOICE
The sound of the voice is produced by the combined function of
many parts of the body which are influenced by various Internal
Organs in Chinese medicine (indicated in brackets). They are: the
lungs themselves (Lungs), larynx (Lungs), epiglottis (Kidneys),
tongue (Heart), teeth (Kidneys), lips (Spleen) and nose (Lungs).
For this reason, the voice can reflect the state of Qi in general
because several organs are involved in its production and,
particularly, the Lungs, Heart, Spleen and Kidneys.
 
The voice is produced by the following organs:
• 
 
lungs (Lungs)
• 
 
larynx (Lungs)
• 
 
epiglottis (Kidneys)
• 
 
tongue (Heart)
• 
 
teeth (Kidneys)
• 
 
lips (Spleen)
• 
 
nose (Lungs).
The voice is an important diagnostic element and one that is
used as soon as the patient comes in and greets us. This gives us
1302
the very first impression of the person’s Qi in general, a strong
voice reflecting a strong Qi (and possibly pathogenic factors) and a
weak voice indicating Qi deficiency.
The voice is an important reflection of the state of the Mind and
Spirit as well because talking in general is controlled by the Heart.
Our voice of course reflects very closely our mental—emotional
state and we can easily detect sadness, fear or anger in someone’s
voice.
The voice is a direct manifestation of Lung-Qi and it readily
reflects the state of the Lung-Qi; the Lungs influence the tone and
strength of the voice.
The Heart influences the speech itself in two ways. First, the
Heart has a profound influence on the tone and texture of the
voice because it controls the tongue, which is a crucial organ in the
production of speech. Secondly, the Heart houses the Mind and
Spirit, and the tone and strength of the voice are very much
affected by the speaker’s mental—emotional state.
The Spleen controls the lips, which are also a crucial factor in the
production of speech, and, obviously, this influences the strength
and tone of the voice. First, if Spleen-Qi is deficient, the lips may
lack strength and the speech may be unclear. Secondly, although
the tone and strength of the voice reflect primarily the state of
Lung-Qi, they also reflect the state of Qi in general and therefore
of the Spleen, which is the root of Postnatal Qi.
The Kidneys influence the pitch and the quality of the voice
because the Original Qi emerging from between the Kidneys
reaches the root of the tongue allowing the larynx to emit sounds.
When listening to the voice, one should assess the overall
strength, tone, pitch and quality of the voice itself and the manner
of speech, that is, whether it is rapid, slow, confused, slurred, etc.
The manner of speech is discussed in the next section, under the
heading ‘Speech’.
Normal Voice
The normal voice should be harmonious, relatively soft, rounded,
clear and of the right strength (not too loud or too weak). The
normal voice is often compared with the sound emitted by a bell
1303
and the Lungs are compared with the bell itself. Therefore, when
the bell is intact its ringing sound is clear. In a similar way, when
Lung-Qi is good and the Lungs are unobstructed by Phlegm, the
voice is clear, its tone is melodious and its pitch is not too high and
not too low. When assessing whether the quality, pitch and tone of
the voice are normal, however, one should be aware that there is
no universal standard because the voice should be related to the
sex, age and body build of the patient. Therefore what is too weak
a voice for a well-built man might be normal for a small-built old
lady.
Allowance should be made also for the emotional state of the
patient as this will easily affect the voice. For example, the ‘Golden
Mirror of Medicine’ (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
) says: 
‘When the Heart is
affected by excess joy, the voice becomes scattered; when the Heart
is affected by anger, the voice becomes indignant and stern; when
the Heart is affected by grief, the voice becomes sad and hoarse …
when the Heart is affected by love the voice is warm and
harmonious. When the Heart is happy, the voice is slow and
relaxed.’
 
1
The Voice And The Five Elements
From a Five-Element perspective, there are five tones of voice:
shouting for Wood, laughing for Fire, singing for Earth, weeping
for Metal and groaning for Water. These tones of voice can be
interpreted in two ways: under physiological conditions, these
tones are normal for those types, that is, it is normal for a Wood
type to have a relatively loud, ‘shouting’ voice; under pathological
conditions, the tone of voice may deviate from its standard by
excess or deficiency, that is, a Wood type may have a voice that is
either ‘too shouting’ or not strong enough.
A shouting voice is loud and is emitted in short, sharp bursts as
if that person were reproaching someone. A person with a
laughing voice will often have short bursts of laughter within their
speech and the voice itself may have an edge of laughter. A singing
tone of voice has a relatively high pitch, is melodious and has a
flow of high and low tones like a song. A weeping voice is
somewhat hesitant, with a relatively low pitch and a sad tone; in
1304
some cases it may sound almost as if the person were about to
burst into tears. A groaning voice sounds guttural, has a low pitch
and is somewhat croaky.
Box 53.1
 
lists the correspondences between the Five Elements
and voice tones.
 
BOX 53.1
 
   
 
FIVE-ELEMENT VOICES
• 
 
Shouting: Wood
• 
 
Laughing: Fire
• 
 
Singing: Earth
• 
 
Weeping: Metal
• 
 
Groaning: Water
Strength And Quality Of The Voice
A strong, loud voice generally indicates a Full condition, whereas a
weak, low and quiet voice indicates an Empty condition.
When considering the quality of the voice we should include the
following various sounds:
 
• 
 
nasal voice
• 
 
hoarse voice
• 
 
snoring
• 
 
groaning
• 
 
crying out
• 
 
stuttering.
Nasal voice
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
Apart from the strength of the voice, one should also assess its
clarity. As mentioned above, the normal voice should sound as
clear as a bell. If the voice sounds muffled, this indicates that the
passages of the Lungs are obstructed. This obstruction may be
caused by external Wind, Phlegm or Dampness.
In Deficiency, if the voice sounds muffled but weak this
1305
indicates a deficiency of Qi and Blood or a deficiency of Lung-Qi,
which is usually combined with retention of Dampness or Phlegm
in the nasal passages.
Hoarse voice
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
A hoarse voice in acute conditions always indicates an invasion
of Wind-Heat with Dryness in the Lung Defensive-Qi system. If we
compare the Lungs to a metal instrument or a bell, in this case the
voice becomes hoarse because the bell is ‘full’ (i.e. the Lungs are
obstructed by Wind); in ancient times this was called ‘
Jin
 
full not
ringing’, 
Jin
 
being an ancient, metal percussion instrument.
A sudden hoarse voice may also be due to stagnation of Liver- or
Lung-Qi affecting the throat from emotional problems.
A hoarse voice in chronic conditions is due to a deficiency of Yin
of the Lungs and Kidneys; in this case, the voice becomes hoarse
because the bell is cracked and, in ancient times, this was called
‘
Jin
 
broken and not ringing’. If the voice becomes hoarse suddenly
in the course of a serious, chronic disease (such as cancer), this
indicates a collapse of Yin or Yang and it is a bad prognostic sign.
A chronic hoarse voice with a swelling of the pharynx may be
due to Phlegm and Blood stasis obstructing the throat.
A hoarse voice during pregnancy is due to a pathology of the
Connecting channel which links the Uterus to the Kidneys. As the
Kidney channel reaches the root of the tongue, a disturbance of
the Connecting channel connecting the Kidneys to the Uterus
during pregnancy prevents Kidney-Qi from rising to the tongue
and it affects the voice. This condition is mentioned in 
Chapter 47
of the ‘Simple Questions’.
 
2
 
It normally improves by itself and
does not require treatment; in fact, the ‘Simple Questions’ says
that this problem does not require treatment because 
‘it will be
resolved in the tenth month’
 
, that is, when the woman gives birth.
A coarse, deep, raucous voice with sudden onset indicates an
invasion of Wind; a nasal voice indicates an invasion of Wind-Cold
or Wind-Dampness.
A difficulty in producing sound with breathlessness and a
rattling sound in the throat like the sound of a saw indicates
retention of Phlegm in the Lungs.
1306
Snoring
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapters 81
 
and 
83
Snoring is generally due to Phlegm or Dampness obstructing
the nasal passages, but we should distinguish loud snoring,
reflecting a purely Full condition of Dampness or Phlegm, from
weak snoring, reflecting a condition of Dampness or Phlegm
against a background of Qi deficiency.
Groaning
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
Groaning generally indicates pain, but we still need to
differentiate loud groaning, reflecting a Full condition causing the
pain, from weak and feeble groaning, reflecting a mixed Full and
Empty condition as the cause of the pain. Groaning from pain is
usually due to Dampness or Qi stagnation.
Crying out
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
Crying out indicates severe pain, usually always of a Full nature;
it is usually due to Blood stasis, Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat.
Stuttering
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
Stuttering may be due to Heart-Blood deficiency or Heart-Fire.
Box 53.2
 
summarizes patterns underlying voice strengths and
qualities.
 
BOX 53.2
 
   
 
VOICE
• 
 
Loud voice: Full condition
• 
 
Weak voice: Empty condition
• 
 
Muffled voice in acute conditions: invasion of Wind
• 
 
Muffled voice in chronic conditions: deficiency of Qi
and Blood
• 
 
Nasal voice: invasion of Wind-Cold or Wind-
Dampness, Phlegm
• 
 
Hoarse voice in acute conditions: invasion of Wind-
Heat or Qi stagnation
• 
 
Hoarse voice in chronic conditions: Yin deficiency (of
1307
Lungs and/or Kidneys)
• 
 
Hoarse voice in chronic conditions with swelling of
the pharynx: Phlegm and Blood stasis
• 
 
Sudden hoarse voice in chronic disease: collapse of
Yin or Yang
• 
 
Hoarse voice during pregnancy: Kidney channel
pathology
• 
 
Coarse, deep, raucous voice with sudden onset:
invasion of Wind
• 
 
Difficulty in emitting sound with breathlessness and
throat rattling: Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Snoring: Phlegm or Dampness obstructing the nasal
passages
• 
 
Weak snoring: Dampness or Phlegm with Qi
deficiency
• 
 
Groaning: pain from Dampness or Qi stagnation
• 
 
Crying out: severe pain of a Full nature from Blood
stasis, Damp-Heat or Toxic Heat
• 
 
Stuttering: Heart-Blood deficiency or Heart-Fire.
SPEECH
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 83
Dislike of speaking generally indicates Qi deficiency of the
Lungs or Spleen, or both, whereas speaking a lot generally
indicates a Full condition and especially Heat of the Heart.
Slurred speech indicates retention of Phlegm and is frequently
seen in patients after Wind-stroke. Incoherent, incessant speech
indicates Phlegm-Fire obstructing the Mind’s orifices. Muttering to
oneself with a low voice indicates Phlegm obstructing the Mind’s
orifices.
Hesitation in speech with difficulty in finding words usually
indicates Dampness or Phlegm obstructing the brain; this
symptom is frequently seen in postviral fatigue syndrome.
Speaking and laughing a lot together with abnormal activity at
night-time may indicate the manic phase (
Kuang
 
) of bipolar
1308
disorder.
Delirious speech occurs in high fevers and it indicates Heat
invading the Pericardium during a febrile disease. Speaking with a
very feeble voice, with the speech frequently interrupted and with
great difficulty in starting speaking again after stopping, indicates
a severe depletion of Qi and is called 
Duo Qi
 
, which literally
means ‘Robbing of Qi’.
Talking in one’s sleep may be due to Full conditions such as
Heart-Fire, Gall-Bladder Heat or Stomach-Heat or to Empty
conditions such as Heart-Blood deficiency: in the former case, the
talking in one’s sleep is agitated and loud while in the latter it is
weak.
Box 53.3
 
summarizes patterns underlying various speech
symptoms and signs.
 
BOX 53.3
 
   
 
SPEECH
• 
 
Dislike of speaking: Qi deficiency (Lungs/Spleen)
• 
 
Speaking too much: Full condition
• 
 
Slurred speech: Phlegm, Wind-stroke
• 
 
Incoherent, incessant speech: Phlegm-Fire
• 
 
Muttering to oneself: Phlegm obstructing the Mind’s
orifices
• 
 
Hesitation in speech with difficulty in finding words:
Dampness or Phlegm
• 
 
Speaking and laughing a lot: manic behaviour (
Kuang
)
• 
 
Delirious speech: Heat in the Pericardium in febrile
diseases
• 
 
Very feeble, interrupted speech: severe depletion of
Qi
• 
 
Talking in one’s sleep: Heart-Fire, Gall-Bladder Heat,
Stomach-Heat, Heart-Blood deficiency
CRYING IN BABIES
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 90
1309
Listening to a baby’s cry forms part of the diagnosis by hearing.
If the baby cries with a high pitch and moves its head from side to
side, this indicates Accumulation Disorder. If the baby cries with a
low sound and intermittently, this indicates Spleen deficiency. If
the baby cries with a long, continuous but soft sound, this
indicates a Deficient condition and possibly swollen tonsils.
BREATHING AND SIGHING
Breathing
The sound of breathing reflects the condition of the Lungs and of
the Kidneys. The general principle is the same as for the voice
sound; that is, breathing with a weak, low sound indicates a
deficiency of the Lungs or 
Kidneys, or both, whereas loud
breathing indicates a Full condition. A shallow breathing sound
indicates deficiency of Yang, whereas breathing with a loud sound
often indicates Lung-Heat.
Apart from these general principles, pathological breathing
sounds may be classified as breathlessness, wheezing, shortness of
breath, rebellious Qi and weakness of Qi.
Pathological Breathing Sounds
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Breathlessness (Chuan)This is characterized by difficulty in
breathing and shortness of breath with raising of the shoulders; it
is a feature of patients suffering from asthma or other obstructive
pulmonary diseases. Such breathlessness can be of a Full or an
Empty type. In the Full type, the breathing is irregular, loud and
coarse, whereas in the Empty type the breathing sound is lower
and the voice weak.
Breathlessness of the Full type is usually due to retention of
Phlegm in the Lungs, whereas that of the Empty type is due to
Phlegm in the Lungs combined with a deficiency of the Lungs,
Spleen or Kidneys.
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
Wheezing (Xiao)
1310
This is characterized by a whistling sound emitted on breathing,
often on exhalation; this is often a symptom of asthma. Wheezing
indicates retention of Phlegm in the Lungs. Phlegm is the
traditional explanation for wheezing in Chinese medicine but, in
my experience, in young people suffering from allergic asthma
there is little or no Phlegm and wheezing is caused by Wind in the
Lungs. For a more complete explanation of this concept see
Chapter 5
 
of ‘The Practice of Chinese Medicine’.
 
3
Shortness of breath (Duan Qi)
This is characterized by short, irregular and rapid breaths but
without the pronounced struggling for breath and raising of
shoulders seen in breathlessness. Shortness of breath indicates
retention of Phlegm in the Lungs combined with Lung deficiency.
Weak breathing (Qi Shao)
This is characterized by weak, low and short breathing sounds,
which indicate a deficiency of Qi of the Lungs or Kidneys, or both.
Rebellious-Qi breathing (Shang Qi)
This is characterized by rapid, short breaths, a cough and a
sensation of oppression of the throat and of energy rising; this is
accompanied by a feeling of anxiety and it is worse lying down.
Rebellious Qi may be due to the rising of the Qi of the Penetrating
Vessel or to Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs.
Box 53.4
 
summarizes the patterns underlying abnormal
breathing sounds.
 
BOX 53.4
 
   
 
THE FIVE PATHOLOGICAL
BREATHING SOUNDS
• 
 
Breathlessness (
Chuan
 
): Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Wheezing (
Xiao
 
): Phlegm or Wind in the Lungs
• 
 
Shortness of breath (
Duan Qi
 
): Phlegm in the Lungs
with Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Weakness of Qi (
Qi Shao
 
): Qi deficiency
(Lungs/Kidneys)
• 
 
Rebellious Qi (
Shang Qi
 
): Rebellious Qi of the
Penetrating Vessel or Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs
1311
Sighing
Sighing generally indicates Qi stagnation of the Liver or Lungs,
which derives from emotional problems such as repressed anger
or frustration if the Liver is involved, or worry and sadness if the
Lungs are involved. Sighing with a weak sound may also be due to
deficiency of the Spleen and Heart deriving from sadness, grief or
pensiveness.
COUGHING AND SNEEZING
Coughing
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 63
The same general principles apply to the sound of coughing,
that is, a cough with a loud sound indicates a Full condition,
whereas a cough with a weak sound indicates an Empty condition.
Apart from this, a cough which is loud and ‘rich’ and which
sounds ‘loose’ indicates Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs. A barking
cough which sounds loud indicates Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs. A
persistent, loud, dry cough with the occasional expectoration of
sputum in acute conditions indicates residual Dryness and Phlegm
in the Lungs after an invasion of Wind-Heat. A persistent, weak,
dry cough with the occasional expectoration of sputum in chronic
conditions indicates Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs. A persistent, dry,
weak cough with a low sound indicates Lung-Yin deficiency.
In children, a barking, loud cough coming in violent bouts with
a characteristic whooping sound and often ending with vomiting
indicates whooping cough.
Box 53.5
 
summarizes the patterns underlying coughing.
 
BOX 53.5
 
   
 
COUGH
• 
 
Loud sound: Full condition
• 
 
Weak sound: Empty condition
• 
 
Loud, rich, loose sound: Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Barking cough with loud sound: Phlegm-Heat in the
Lungs
• 
 
Persistent, dry, loud cough with occasional
expectoration of scanty sputum in acute conditions:
1312
residual Dryness and Phlegm in the Lungs after an
invasion of Wind-Heat
• 
 
Persistent, dry, weak cough with occasional
expectoration of scanty sputum in chronic conditions:
Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs
• 
 
Persistent, dry, weak cough with low sound: Lung-Yin
deficiency
• 
 
Barking, loud cough in violent bouts in children:
whooping cough
Sneezing
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 58
Sneezing is usually due to an impairment of the Lung’s diffusing
of Qi. The normal sneezing that occurs as a reaction to airborne
particles entering the nose is an expression of a good state of Yang-
Qi. 
Chapter 28
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ attributes this normal
sneezing to the Heart: ‘
 
When Yang-Qi is harmonized, it fills the
Heart, exits at the nose and causes sneezing
 
.’
 
4
 
Chapter 23
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’ relates sneezing also to the Kidneys; it says: ‘
The Heart controls belching, the Lungs control coughing, the Liver
controls the flow of speech, the Spleen controls swallowing and the
Kidneys control sneezing
 
.’
 
5
Sneezing with a loud sound indicates a Full condition, which is
usually due to invasion of external Wind, whereas sneezing with a
weak sound indicates an Empty condition of the Lungs as, for
example, in allergic rhinitis. Acute sneezing is due to invasion of
Wind; if this is accompanied by profuse nasal discharge this
indicates invasion of Wind-Cold. According tosome doctors, if,
after an invasion of Wind, the pathogenic factor penetrates the
Interior and the patient suddenly starts sneezing again, this
indicates that the body’s Qi is recovering.
Box 53.6
 
summarizes the patterns underlying sneezing.
 
BOX 53.6
 
   
 
SNEEZING
• 
 
Loud sound: Full condition
• 
 
Weak sound: Empty condition
1313
• 
 
Acute sneezing: invasion of Wind
• 
 
Weak chronic sneezing: chronic retention of Wind in
the nose (allergic rhinitis)
• 
 
Sneezing with profuse nasal discharge: invasion of
Wind-Cold
HICCUP
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Hiccup with a loud, high-pitched sound indicates a Full
condition and often Heat; this type of hiccup may be due to
Stomach-Qi rebelling upwards, Stomach-Heat or Liver-Qi invading
the Stomach. Infrequent hiccup with a deep but strong sound may
be due to Cold in the Stomach. Infrequent, weak hiccup with a low
sound indicates Stomach deficiency. Frequent but weak hiccup
indicates Stomach-Yin deficiency.
Box 53.7
 
summarizes the patterns underlying hiccup.
 
BOX 53.7
 
   
 
HICCUP
• 
 
Loud, high-pitched sound: Stomach-Qi rebelling
upwards, Stomach-Heat, Liver-Qi invading the Somach
• 
 
Deep and strong sound: Cold in the Stomach
• 
 
Weak with low sound: Stomach deficiency
• 
 
Weak and frequent: Stomach-Yin deficiency
BELCHING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 30
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Belching with a loud and long sound indicates a Full condition,
which may be retention of food, Stomach-Heat or Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach. Belching with a short and low sound
indicates a deficient condition, which may be Stomach-Qi
deficiency or Stomach deficient and cold.
Box 53.8
 
summarizes the patterns underlying belching.
1314
 
BOX 53.8
 
   
 
BELCHING
• 
 
Loud and long: retention of food, Stomach-Heat,
    
 
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
• 
 
Short and low: Stomach-Qi deficiency, Stomach
deficient and cold
VOMITING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 30
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 69
Vomiting with a loud sound indicates a Full condition, which
may be retention of food, Stomach-Heat, Liver- and Stomach-Heat
or Full-Cold in the Stomach. Vomiting with a weak sound indicates
Deficiency, which may be Stomach-Qi deficiency, Stomach deficient
and cold or Stomach-Yin deficiency. Bouts of vomiting depending
on the emotional state usually indicate rebellious Liver-Qi
invading the Stomach.
Box 53.9
 
summarizes the patterns underlying vomiting.
 
BOX 53.9
 
   
 
VOMITING
• 
 
Loud sound: retention of food, Stomach-Heat, Liver-
and Stomach-Heat, Full-Cold in the stomach
• 
 
Weak sound: Stomach-Qi deficiency, Stomach
deficient and cold, Stomach-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Bouts of vomiting depending on emotional state:
    
 
Liver-Qi rebellious invading the Stomach
NOTES
1. 
Qian, Wu. Golden Mirror of Medicine (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1977; 877.
[Vol. 2, First published in 1742].
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:259 First
1315
published c. 100
BC
3. 
Maciocia G. 2000 The Practice of Chinese Medicine,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh
4. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:67 First published c. 100
BC
5. 
Simple Questions, p. 150.
1316
CHAPTER 54
 
DIAGNOSIS BY
SMELLING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
BODY ODOUR
ODOUR OF BODILY SECRETIONS
Breath
Sweat
Sputum
Urine and stools
Vaginal discharge and lochia
Intestinal gas
INTRODUCTION
Diagnosis by smelling is not a major part of the diagnostic
process. It is used mostly to confirm our diagnosis and is seldom a
clinching factor. The Five-Element smells mentioned below are
useful mostly to correlate to the patient’s Element type and to
1317
indicate accordance with or discordance from it. For example, a
rancid smell in a Wood Element is a pathological exaggeration of a
constitutional Wood smell and therefore is less serious than
another smell would be.
There are two quite distinct aspects to diagnosis by smelling: the
first is the odour of the patient’s body itself, which can give us an
idea not only of the prevailing pattern of disharmony but also of
the patient’s constitutional type; the second is the odour of certain
bodily secretions, which is used only to identity the prevailing
pattern of disharmony.
Assuming the patient is not wearing perfume or strong after-
shave (I normally ask my patients not to use perfume or after-
shave when they come for their first consultation), diagnosis by
smelling is carried out as the interrogation progresses. In some
cases, the body odour is quite clear, even overwhelming. If there is
no particular odour emanating from the body at the start of the
interrogation, in most cases it will become apparent when the
patient is lying down, undressed, for acupuncture.
BODY ODOUR
From a Five-Element perspective, the five body odours are: rancid
for Wood, scorched for Fire, fragrant or sweetish for Earth, rotten
for Metal and putrid for Water. From this point of view, these body
odours 
reflect a disharmony in the relevant Element, which may be
a Deficiency or an Excess. In a few cases, these body odours are
very apparent as soon as the patient comes in, but in most cases
these odours are detected only when the patient undresses and
especially on the back.
Sometimes, the Five-Element body odour emanates after the
needles have been in for about 20 minutes. In my experience, the
two most common Five-Element body odours are the putrid and
rancid ones; the putrid odour is relatively common in the elderly
(presumably caused by a decline of Kidney-Qi).
The body odour can be used diagnostically in two ways. In the
absence of patterns of disharmony accounting for a particular
odour, the body odour reflects the patient’s constitutional Element
type in the same way as do the body shape and facial structures.
1318
Thus, a slightly rancid odour will emanate from a Wood type, a
slightly scorched one from a Fire type, etc. In addition to the
constitutional body odour, patients’ body odour reflects the
patterns they are suffering from and these may not necessarily
accord with their Element type. For example, a Wood type may
emanate a slightly scorched smell, indicating the presence of a
Heart pattern. Indeed, if the body odour contradicts the
constitutional Element type, this is a bad sign. In other words, it is
worse for a Wood type to have a scorched odour (for example) than
a rancid one.
Box 54.1
 
summarizes the correspondences between the Five
Elements and body odours.
 
BOX 54.1
 
   
 
FIVE-ELEMENT ODOURS
• 
 
Rancid: Wood
• 
 
Scorched: Fire
• 
 
Fragrant/sweetish: Earth
• 
 
Rotten: Metal
• 
 
Putrid: Water
ODOUR OF BODILY SECRETIONS
Diagnosis by smelling is based also on detecting the smell of
bodily secretions. Obviously it is impractical for a practitioner to
be able to smell a patient’s urine or vaginal discharge. However, I
usually ask patients if they have noticed a strong smell; most
people are very aware if any of their bodily secretions are
particularly smelly.
Bodily secretions include:
 
• 
 
breath
• 
 
sweat
• 
 
sputum
• 
 
urine and stools
• 
 
vaginal discharge and lochia
• 
 
intestinal gas.
1319
Breath
The odour emanating from the mouth is closely related to the
condition of the digestive system. Generally speaking, a strong,
unpleasant breath indicates Stomach-Heat or retention of food. A
sour-smelling breath indicates retention of food, or in children
Accumulation Disorder. A foul and somewhat pungent breath
indicates Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen. A rotten-
smelling breath may indicate Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine,
which may be due to ulcerative colitis.
Box 54.2
 
summarizes the patterns underlying breath smells.
 
BOX 54.2
 
   
 
BREATH SMELLS
• 
 
Strong, foul: Stomach-Heat or Retention of Food
• 
 
Sour: Retention of Food, Accumulation Disorder (in
children)
• 
 
Foul, pungent: Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Rotten: Damp-Heat in Large Intestine
Sweat
The smell of sweat is often related to Dampness because the fluids
forming sweat come from the space between the skin and muscles
where Dampness often accumulates. Any strong-smelling sweat
often indicates Damp-Heat. Putrid-smelling sweat may indicate a
disease of the lungs, liver or kidneys.
Sputum
A strong-smelling sputum, often smelling rotten, indicates Heat in
the Lungs and usually Phlegm-Heat or Toxic Heat. A fishy-smelling
sputum may also indicate Lung-Heat. Sputum without smell
indicates Cold.
Urine And Stools
Foul-smelling stools always indicate Heat or Damp-Heat in the
Intestines, whereas an irregularity of the 
bowel movement and an
1320
absence of smell indicates usually a Cold condition.
As for urine, strong-smelling urine indicates Damp-Heat in the
Bladder; absence of smell indicates Cold.
Vaginal Discharge And Lochia
A strong-smelling, leathery smell of vaginal discharge indicates
Damp-Heat; a fishy smell indicates Damp-Cold.
Strong-smelling lochia after childbirth may indicate Damp-Heat
or Toxic Heat in the Uterus.
Intestinal Gas
A strong, foul-smelling intestinal gas indicates Damp-Heat in the
Large Intestine. If the gas smells rancid and rotten like rotten
eggs, this indicates Toxic Heat in the Large Intestines.
The release of gas without smell usually indicates Spleen-Qi
deficiency.
1321
PART 5
SYMPTOMS
AND SIGNS
1322
 
SYMPTOMS AND
SIGNS
 
Part contents
SECTION 1
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF PARTS OF THE BODY
55. 
 
Head, hair and face
56. 
 
Face colour
57. 
 
Ears
58. 
 
Nose
59. 
 
Throat
60. 
 
Mouth, tongue, teeth, gums, lips, palate
and philtrum
61. 
 
Eyes
62. 
 
Neck, shoulders and upper back
63. 
 
Chest
64. 
 
Limbs
65. 
 
Arms
66. 
 
Legs
67. 
 
Lower back
68. 
 
Body
1323
69. 
 
Digestive system and taste
70. 
 
Thirst and drink
71. 
 
Abdomen
72. 
 
Defecation
73. 
 
Urination
74. 
 
Anus
75. 
 
Men’s sexual and genital symptoms
76. 
 
Sweating
77. 
 
Skin signs
78. 
 
Emotional symptoms
79. 
 
Mental and emotional symptoms
80. 
 
Mental difficulties
81. 
 
Sleep problems
82. 
 
Feeling of cold, feeling of heat, fever
83. 
 
Voice, speech and sounds
SECTION 2
GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
84. 
 
Menstrual symptoms
85. 
 
Problems at period time
86. 
 
Problems during pregnancy
87. 
 
Problems after childbirth
88. 
 
Breast signs
89. 
 
Miscellaneous gynaecological
symptoms
SECTION 3
PAEDIATRIC SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
90. 
 
Children’s problems
1324
INTRODUCTION
Whereas 
Part 1
 
on Observation lists the signs, which can be
observed, and 
Part 2
 
on Interrogation discusses symptoms that are
elicited on interrogation, 
Part 5
 
lists both symptoms and signs,
according to area of the body, without distinction between what is
seen on observation and what is elicited from asking the patient.
The separation between observation and interrogation is made
purely for didactic purposes and does not correspond to clinical
reality where what is seen on observation and what is elicited on
interrogation occurs simultaneously and may be integrated
automatically. For example, the separation between bloodshot eyes
(observation) and eye pain (interrogation) is artificial and
unrealistic.
Moreover, the combination of both symptoms and signs for each
area corresponds also to how we normally proceed with the
patient. For example, when patients come in with their clinical
manifestations mainly concentrated in one area of the body, we
would naturally investigate that area by asking about symptoms
and observing any outward sign without distinction between
interrogation and observation; if a patient complains of blurred
vision, for instance, we would immediately and automatically
observe the eyes to see whether they are dry or bloodshot.
To clarify the links between 
Part 5
 
, on Symptoms and Signs, 
Part
1
 
, on Observation, and 
Part 2
 
, on Interrogation, I have indicated
them in each of these Parts (e.g. ‘Dizziness’ found in 
Chapter 55
 
of
Part 5
 
is also found in 
Chapter 34
 
of 
Part 2
 
).
The symptoms and signs listed in 
Part 5
 
are mostly described in
terms taken from Chinese books, but with the following
adaptations:
 
1. 
 
I have integrated into the listed symptoms and signs
some symptoms (e.g. constant picking) and signs (e.g.
blushing) which I felt are common in the West but
which are missing from the Chinese texts.
2. 
 
For many symptoms and signs I have introduced new
patterns which I have not found in the Chinese source
texts.
3. 
 
I have eliminated certain symptoms and signs or
1325
patterns that are seen only in China and added some
that are typical of Western patients.
4. 
 
Within each pattern I have added symptoms and
signs specific to the symptom or sign discussed.
Part 5
 
is divided into three sections, arranged by body area, as
follows:
Section 1
 
: Symptoms and signs of parts of the body
Section 2
 
: Gynaecological symptoms and signs
Section 3
 
: Paediatric symptoms and signs.
For each symptom or sign I list the most common patterns that
cause it. I would like to draw the reader’s attention to the
following points:
 
• 
 
The symptoms/signs are arranged, as much as
possible, in order of frequency within each chapter, or
(in longer chapters) within each chapter section.
• 
 
The patterns pertaining to each symptom/sign are
arranged generally in the order of Excess and then
Deficiency patterns; within each of these groups, they
appear in order of frequency.
• 
 
There are more symptoms and signs in 
Part 5
 
than
there are in 
Part 1
 
on Observation and 
Part 2
 
on
Interrogation, but all the symptoms and signs in these
two Parts are found in the present 
Part 5
 
.
• 
 
The patterns pertaining to each symptom/sign in 
Part
5
 
do not necessarily correspond exactly to those in the
Appendixes for various reasons:
— 
 
Whenever possible, the pattern has been
changed to make it more specific to the
symptom/sign in which it appears (e.g.
the Liver-Blood deficiency pattern for
blurred vision will contain more eye or
face symptoms).
— 
 
The patterns have also been changed by
1326
listing the symptoms and signs that are
more closely related to the presenting
symptom.
— 
 
There are certain patterns that are
peculiar to the symptom/sign discussed
and which do not occur in other cases
(e.g. Fetus-Toxin Heat in the children’s
section). This reflects also the fact that, in
clinical practice, conditions do not
always neatly fall into the standard
patterns.
— 
 
The list of all possible manifestations in
each pattern has usually been shortened
in 
Part 5
 
compared with the patterns in
the Appendixes.
• 
 
Whenever appropriate, I have indicated, with small
figures, the kind of patient in whom that particular
pattern occurs more frequently. If the symbol for a man
or woman is combined with the symbol for the elderly,
this means that that pattern is more common in an
elderly man or woman respectively. Of course, these
symbols should not be interpreted too rigidly; that is, if
there is the symbol of a woman against a particular
pattern, that simply means that the pattern is more
frequent in women and 
not
 
that that pattern cannot
occur in men. The symbolic figures are as follows:
— 
 
a man, indicating that that pattern is
more common in men
— 
 
a woman, indicating that that pattern is
more common in women
— 
 
a child, indicating that that pattern is
more common in children
— 
 
an old person, indicating that that
1327
pattern is more common in the elderly
(man or woman)
— 
 
a pregnant woman, indicating that that
pattern is more common in pregnant
women or women after childbirth
The main Chinese source texts used for 
Part 5
 
are:
 
1. 
 
Zhang Zhu Sheng 1995 Great Treatise of Diagnosis by
Observation in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue
Wang Shen Da Quan
 
), Shanxi Science Publishing House,
Taiyuan.
2. 
 
Zhao Jin Duo 1985 Identification of Patterns and
Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Zheng Zhuang
Jian Bie Zhen Duan Xue
 
), People’s Health Publishing
House, Beijing.
3. 
 
Zhu Wen Feng 1999 Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
), People’s Health Publishing
House, Beijing.
4. 
 
Zhao Jin Duo 1991 Differential Diagnosis and
Patterns in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Zheng Hou Jian
Bie Zhen Duan Xue
 
), People’s Health Publishing House,
Beijing.
For ease of consultation, there are two lists of the Symptoms and
Signs (see Index of symptoms and signs, p. xlix): the first arranged
according to body area and the second alphabetically irrespective
of body area.
1328
SECTION 1
SYMPTOMS
AND SIGNS OF
PARTS OF THE
BODY
1329
 
SYMPTOMS AND
SIGNS OF PARTS OF
THE BODY
 
Section contents
55. 
 
Head and face
56. 
 
Face colour
57. 
 
Ears
58. 
 
Nose
59. 
 
Throat
60. 
 
Mouth, tongue, teeth, gums, lips, palate
and philtrum
61. 
 
Eyes
62. 
 
Neck, shoulders and upper back
63. 
 
Chest
64. 
 
Limbs
65. 
 
Arms
66. 
 
Legs
67. 
 
Lower back
68. 
 
Body
1330
69. 
 
Digestive system and taste
70. 
 
Thirst and drink
71. 
 
Abdomen
72. 
 
Defecation
73. 
 
Urination
74. 
 
Anus
75. 
 
Men’s sexual and genital symptoms
76. 
 
Sweating
77. 
 
Skin signs
78. 
 
Emotional symptoms
79. 
 
Mental and emotional symptoms
80. 
 
Mental difficulties
81. 
 
Sleep problems
82. 
 
Feeling of cold, feeling of heat, fever
83. 
 
Voice, speech and sounds
INTRODUCTION
This first section of 
Part 5
 
deals with general symptoms and signs
of the whole body. 
Part 5
 
lists both symptoms and signs, by area of
the body, without distinction between what is seen on observation
and what is elicited from asking the patient. The separation
between observation and interrogation does not correspond to
clinical reality where what is seen on observation and what is
elicited on interrogation occurs simultaneously and may be
integrated automatically. For example, the separation between
bloodshot eyes (observation) and eye pain (interrogation) is
artificial and unrealistic. The collection of both symptoms (elicited
by interrogation) and signs (elicited by observation) for each part
of the body corresponds to clinical reality. To give another example,
if a patient complains of joint ache (interrogation), the first thing
we would naturally do is to look at the joint to see whether it is
1331
swollen (observation) and we would also palpate the joint
(palpation); thus, in this example, observation, interrogation and
palpation all converge into one.
Moreover, the combination of both symptoms and signs for each
area corresponds to how we normally proceed with the patient. For
example, if a patient’s clinical manifestations are mainly
concentrated in one area of the body, we would naturally
investigate that area by asking about symptoms and observing any
outward sign without distinction between interrogation and
observation; if the patient complains of blurred vision, for
instance, we would immediately and automatically observe the
eyes to see if they are dry or bloodshot.
To clarify the links between 
Part 5
 
, on Symptoms and Signs, 
Part
1
 
, on Observation, and 
Part 2
 
, on Interrogation, I have indicated
them in each of these parts (e.g. ‘Dizziness’ found in 
Chapter 55
 
of
Part 5
 
is also found in 
Chapter 34
 
of 
Part 2
 
).
1332
CHAPTER 55
 
HEAD, HAIR AND
FACE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
HEAD
Dizziness
Fainting
Feeling of heaviness of the head
Headache
Feeling of distension of the head
Feeling of muzziness (fuzziness) of the head
Feeling of cold of the head
Feeling of heat of the head
Numbness of the head
Drooping head
Leaning of the head to one side
Tremor of the head
Brain noise
1333
Swelling of the whole head
Ulcers in the mastoid region
Head tilted backwards
HAIR AND SCALP
Premature greying of the hair
Hair falling out
Alopecia
Dry and brittle hair
Greasy hair
Dandruff
Itchy scalp
Dry scalp
Redness and pain of the scalp
Boils on the scalp
Erosion of the scalp
Ulcers on the scalp
FACE
Acne
Feeling of heat of the face
Facial pain
Numbness of the face
Oedema of the face
Tic
Deviation of eye and mouth
Facial paralysis
Papular/macular eruptions
1334
Swelling and redness of the face
Swelling, redness and pain of the cheeks
Ulcers below the zygomatic arch
Lines on the face
HEAD
Dizziness
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
The dizziness from a Full condition is always more severe than
that from an Empty condition.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Mild dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of
limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency 
Dizziness worse after exertion, a feeling of emptiness of the head,
tinnitus, backache, tiredness, weak knees.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Liver-Yang rising
Dizziness with headache, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the head
Dizziness, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, dizziness, blurred vision,
somnolence, nausea, sputum in the throat, muzziness of the head,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
1335
Liver-Fire 
Dizziness, headache, red face, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Severe dizziness, vertigo, tremors, tinnitus, headache, numbness
of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
This is the most severe type of dizziness.
Qi and Blood deficiency of the Spleen and Heart 
Mild, postural dizziness, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools,
poor appetite, scanty periods, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or
Fine pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Mild dizziness, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
 
clinical note
• 
 
In women, Liver-Blood deficiency is the most
common cause of dizziness. A Kidney deficiency is also
common.
• 
 
In the elderly, look for Phlegm as a cause of dizziness.
• 
 
When it is clearly due to emotional problems,
dizziness is often due to Liver-Yang rising.
Fainting
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
1336
Liver-Qi stagnation with Liver-Qi rebelling upwards to
cloud the orifices 
Fainting, mouth closed and hands clenched, coarse breathing, cold
hands and feet, Wiry-Deep pulse.
Blood-Heat with Liver-Fire blazing upwards to cloud
the orifices 
Sudden fainting, unconsciousness, clenched teeth, closed mouth,
clenched fists, red face, red lips, bloodshot eyes, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Wiry-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm clouding the orifices
Sudden fainting with unconsciousness or episodes of fainting
without complete loss of consciousness, sputum in the throat, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea, vomiting, coarse
breathing, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Retention of food 
 
Episodes of fainting after overeating, breathlessness, epigastric
fullness and distension, foul breath, sour regurgitation, thick
sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Short, transient episodes of fainting, often without complete loss
of consciousness, dull-pale complexion, palpitations, anxiety,
insomnia, cold hands, pale lips, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency 
Short, transient episodes of fainting, often without complete loss
of consciousness, dull-pale complexion with floating-red
cheekbones, palpitations, anxiety, insomnia, dry throat at night,
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
 
Short, transient episodes of fainting, often without complete loss
of consciousness, in women often coinciding with the period, dull-
1337
pale face, pale lips, cold hands, dizziness, blurred vision, sweating,
weak breathing, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
 
Short, transient episodes of fainting, often without complete loss
of consciousness, in women often coinciding with the period, dull-
pale face with red cheekbones, dizziness, blurred vision, sweating,
weak breathing, dry hair, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency and deficiency of the Original
Qi
Short, transient episodes of fainting, often without loss of
consciousness, open mouth, relaxed hands, weak breathing, pale
complexion, sweating, cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Feeling Of Heaviness Of The Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
A feeling of heaviness of the head is always caused by Dampness
or Phlegm obstructing the head.
Damp-Phlegm
A feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head and body,
dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, nausea, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Dampness
A feeling of heaviness of the head and body that is worse in the
afternoon, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a sticky
taste, epigastric fullness, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating, Slippery or
Soggy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Damp-
Heat or Cold-Dampness.
1338
Headache
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
Liver-Yang rising
Distending headache, which can be on the side of the head on the
Gall-Bladder channel, on the temples or behind the eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
Wiry pulse.
This is probably the most common type of headache. Liver-Yang
rising may arise from deficiency of Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin, or
both, or from Kidney-Yin deficiency and the clinical manifestations
will vary accordingly.
Wind-Phlegm
Pulling headache with a feeling of heaviness of the head, severe
dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Dampness obstructing the head
Headache with a feeling of heaviness of the head, head feeling as if
wrapped in cotton wool, a sticky taste, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, epigastric fullness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating, Slippery
or Soggy pulse.
Turbid Phlegm obstructing the head
Dull headache with a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the
head, poor memory and concentration, dizziness, blurred vision,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Fire
Distending headache, which can be on the side of the head on the
Gall-Bladder channel, on the temples or behind the eyes, red and
1339
bloodshot eyes, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Pulling headache, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, numbness of
the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Distending headache on the temples or forehead, or both,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis
Stabbing headache fixed in a small area, purple lips, dark
complexion, Purple tongue.
Stomach-Heat
Severe headache on the forehead, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Qi deficiency
Dull headache on the forehead that is aggravated by overwork and
alleviated by rest and by lying down, uncomfortable feeling in the
epigastrium, no appetite, lack of sense of taste, loose stools,
tiredness especially in the morning, weak limbs, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
This is generally due to Stomach-Qi deficiency.
Blood deficiency 
Dull headache on the forehead or the vertex, dizziness, blurred
vision, poor memory, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether the Liver or
1340
Heart is affected.
Kidney deficiency
Dull headache with a feeling of emptiness of the head, aggravated
by overexertion, dizziness, lower backache, weak knees, tinnitus.
The other clinical manifestations depend on whether there is a
Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Retention of food 
Headache on the forehead that is worse after eating, fullness, pain
and distension of the epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting,
nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation,
belching, insomnia, loose stools or constipation, poor appetite,
thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
This type of headache is usually seen only in children.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Occipital headache, stiff neck, aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy
throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose with clear
watery discharge, sneezing, body aches, thin white tongue coating,
Floating-Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Headache of the whole head, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Dampness
Frontal headache, feeling of heaviness of the head, aversion to
cold, fever, epigastric fullness, body aches, tongue with thin, sticky
white coating, Floating-Slippery pulse.
Apart from the above pattern identification according to
Internal Organs, it is also important, especially from an
acupuncturist’s perspective, to differentiate headaches according
to the channel involved.
1341
Greater-Yang channels
Occipital headache radiating to the back of the neck and top of the
back.
Bright-Yang channels
Headache on the forehead.
Lesser-Yang channels
Headaches on the temples, the sides of the head and neck along
the Gall-Bladder channel and Triple Burner channel.
Greater-Yin channels
Frontal headache.
Lesser-Yin channels
Headache felt inside the head or on the occiput, dull in character.
Terminal-Yin channels
Headache on the vertex.
 
clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, the combination of Liver-Yang
rising and Phlegm is the most common cause of chronic
headaches.
• 
 
In women, Liver-Yang rising (causing chronic
headaches) usually arises from Liver-Blood deficiency
Feeling Of Distension Of The Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
Liver-Yang rising
A feeling of distension of the head, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
1342
Liver-Fire
A feeling of distension of the head, eye ache, blood-shot eyes,
headaches, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
An acute feeling of distension of the head, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Feeling Of Muzziness (Fuzziness) Of The
Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
Dampness
Muzziness of the head, a feeling of heaviness of the head, chronic
sinusitis, stuffed nose, sticky nasal discharge, dull frontal
headache as if the head were wrapped in cotton wool, epigastric
fullness, a sticky taste, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating, Slippery or
Soggy pulse.
Phlegm
Severe muzziness of the head, dizziness, a feeling of heaviness of
the head, blurred vision, excessive production of ear wax, stuffed
nose, dull frontal headache, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
 
clinical note
• 
 
Phlegm is by far the most common cause of a feeling
of muzziness (fuzziness) of the head.
1343
Feeling Of Cold Of The Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
This includes an actual feeling of cold of the head but also a
propensity to wearing a hat and a strong dislike of wind.
Governing Vessel empty and cold
A feeling of cold of the head and back, cold limbs, a feeling of cold,
sore back, cold feet, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, pale
complexion, pulse Floating but Weak on all three positions on the
left.
Cold in the Liver channel
A feeling of cold of the head, vertical headache, bluish complexion,
cold hands and feet, Deep-Tight pulse.
Feeling Of Heat Of The Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
Liver-Fire
A feeling of heat of the head, red face, red and bloodshot eyes, eye
ache, headaches, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
A feeling of heat of the head especially in the evening, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, dark scanty
urine, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Numbness Of The Head
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
1344
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Numbness of the skin of the head, especially on the vertex, dull
headache, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of
limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Damp-Phlegm
Numbness of the skin of the head, especially on the forehead, a
feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence,
nausea, sputum in the throat, muzziness of the head, Swollen
tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Unilateral numbness of the head, tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or
Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Drooping Head
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Head drooping, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Emptiness of the Sea of Marrow
Head drooping, dizziness, tinnitus, deafness, sore back, poor
memory, weak knees, difficulty in walking. This is 
usually, but not
always, accompanied by Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Leaning Of The Head To One Side
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Spleen-Qi sinking
Leaning of the head to one side, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
1345
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, depression, tendency to
obesity, a bearing-down sensation in the abdomen, prolapse of
stomach, uterus, anus or bladder, frequency and urgency of
urination, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Emptiness of the Sea of Marrow
Leaning of the head to one side, dizziness, tinnitus, deafness, sore
back, poor memory, weak knees, difficulty in walking. This is
usually, but not always, accompanied by Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Tremor Of The Head
Observation,
 
Chapters 4
 
and 
5
Liver-Wind 
Tremor of the head, vertigo, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Empty-Wind from Blood deficiency 
Slight tremor of the head, slight tremor of the hand, facial tic,
dizziness, poor memory, blurred vision, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Empty-Wind from Yin deficiency 
Slight tremor of the head, slight tremor of the hand, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Brain Noise
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
‘Brain noise’ is similar to the sound of tinnitus in the ears but it
is experienced in the centre of the head. The Chinese name for it is
nao ting
 
, which means ‘brain tinnitus’, its old name was 
lei tou feng
, which means ‘thunder head wind’.
1346
Emptiness of the Sea of Marrow
Brain noise like tinnitus, dizziness, tinnitus, brain noise, poor
memory, deafness, a feeling of emptiness of the head, blurred
vision.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Spleen and Heart 
Brain noise like tinnitus, poor memory, dizziness, insomnia,
palpitations, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Phlegm-Heat rising
Brain noise like tinnitus, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of
the head, headache, dizziness, blurred vision, nausea, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Red-Swollen tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Brain noise like tinnitus, tense neck muscles, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi impairs the ascending and descending of Qi,
clear Qi cannot rise, and turbid Qi cannot descend so that
turbidity accumulates in the head.
Swelling Of The Whole Head
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
‘Big Head Warm Disease’ (invasion of Toxic Heat in the
head) 
Swelling of the head and face, swollen glands, swelling of the
parotid gland, swollen tonsils, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, tongue slightly Red on
the sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1347
Ulcers In The Mastoid Region
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder channel
Ulcers in the mastoid region, hypochondrial pain, fullness and
distension, nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow
complexion and eyes, dizziness, tin 
nitus, irritability, a feeling of
heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Ulcers in the mastoid region, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Head Tilted Backwards
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Internal Wind in acute febrile diseases 
Head tilted backwards, with eyes rolled up, opisthotonos, fever at
night, convulsions, macular rash, Red tongue without coating, Fine
and Wiry pulse.
Hair and scalp
Premature Greying Of The Hair
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Premature greying of the hair especially on the vertex, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
1348
Liver and Kidney deficiency
Premature greying of the hair over the whole head, balding,
dizziness, tinnitus, blurred vision, backache, decreased libido.
Other clinical manifestations depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Premature greying of the hair, balding, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, dark scanty urine,
insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Premature greying of the hair, poor bone development in children,
softening of the bones in adults, deafness, weakness of the knees
and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature
greying of the hair, weakness from sexual activity, lower backache,
infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Premature greying of the hair, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver- and Heart-Fire
Hair turning white suddenly after a shock or a very intense
emotional upset such as anger, headaches, bloodshot eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, red face, thirst, bitter taste,
palpitations, agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with redder sides and tip and dry yellow
1349
coating, Wiry-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Premature greying of the hair in patches which may appear in a
relatively short time, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
This pattern is due to worry, pensiveness or anger causing Qi
stagnation, which turns into Heat, which, in turn, damages Yin.
Hair Falling Out
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
This refers to hair falling out gradually and uniformly (as
opposed to in clumps).
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Gradual loss of hair, dull headache, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness or tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Gradual loss of hair, which may improve during pregnancy,
dizziness, tinnitus, backache, tiredness.
Other symptoms and signs, including pulse and tongue, depend
on whether there is a deficiency of Kidney-Yin, Kidney-Yang or
Kidney-Essence.
Blood-Heat from Liver-Fire
Gradual loss of hair especially on the vertex, red face, bloodshot
eyes, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Alopecia
1350
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Alopecia refers to the loss of hair falling out in clumps.
Empty Liver-Wind from Blood deficiency 
Sudden loss of hair in clumps, slight tremor of the head or hand,
or both, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision, unilateral
numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or
Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Full Liver-Wind 
Sudden loss of hair in clumps, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood Heat from Liver-Fire 
Hair falling out in clumps, dry hair, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Hair falling out in clumps, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful
periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the
abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
 
clinical note
• 
 
Remember: as a rule of thumb, if the hair falls
gradually it is due to a deficiency (of Liver-Blood or
Kidneys), whereas if it falls out in clumps it is due to a
Fullness (often internal Wind).
Dry And Brittle Hair
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
1351
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dry hair without lustre, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry hair without lustre, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
poor memory, hardness of hearing, night sweating, vertigo, dry
mouth and throat at night, lower backache, ache in bones,
nocturnal emissions, constipation, dark scanty urine, infertility,
premature ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight
anxiety, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Thin and brittle hair, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Thin and brittle hair, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of taste sensation, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Loss of Blood
Dry and lifeless hair without lustre, dry skin, pale complexion,
menorrhagia, Pale and dry tongue, Hollow pulse.
 
clinical note
• 
 
In women patients, I always observe the hair early on
during the consultation to check the state of Liver-
Blood.
1352
Greasy Hair
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Dampness
Greasy hair, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, epigastric
fullness, a sticky taste, a feeling of 
oppression of the chest,
excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating, Slippery or
Soggy pulse.
Damp-Heat
Greasy hair, epigastric fullness, a sticky taste, thirst with no desire
to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of
heat, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm
Greasy hair, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in the
throat, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Dandruff
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Liver-Blood deficient and dry 
Dandruff, dry hair, dry skin, dry eyes, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Wind
Dandruff, dry hair, dry skin, slight tremor of the head or hand or
both facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision, unilateral
numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or
Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Dandruff, a feeling of heat of the head, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
1353
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver
Dandruff, greasy hair, yellow eyes, excessive ear wax production,
fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, excessive vaginal
discharge and itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, genital papular or
vesicular skin rashes and itching, urinary difficulty, burning on
urination with dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Dandruff, scalp skin infections, boils on the head, a feeling of heat
of the head, red eyes, thirst, Red tongue with red points and thick,
dry yellow coating, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Dryness
Dandruff with acute onset, dry cough, aversion to cold, fever, dry
throat, tickly throat, dry nose, discomfort of the chest, thin, dry
white coating, Floating pulse.
Itchy Scalp
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 34
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Itchy scalp, dandruff, dry scalp and hair, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Wind
Itchy scalp, dandruff, dry scalp and hair, dry skin, slight tremor of
the head or hand or both, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision,
unilateral numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
1354
Liver-Yin deficiency
Itchy scalp, dry scalp and hair, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, blurred vision, floaters in the eyes, dry eyes, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion but with red cheekbones,
withered and brittle nails, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Itchy scalp, feeling of heat of the head, dry scalp, headache, red
face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Itchy scalp, skin eruptions on the scalp, psoriasis of scalp, fullness
of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste,
nausea, feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge,
vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, genital papular or
vesicular shin rashes and itching, urinary difficulty, burning on
urination, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Dry Scalp
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Liver-Yin deficiency
Dry scalp, dry hair, dandruff, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation,
withered and brittle nails, normal colour tongue without coating,
Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry scalp, dry hair, dandruff, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory, hardness of hearing, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache, dry
stools, dark scanty urine, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
1355
Floating-Empty pulse.
Redness And Pain Of The Scalp
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Acute redness and pain of the scalp, aversion to cold, fever, cough,
sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Redness and pain of the scalp, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Boils On The Scalp
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Liver-Fire
Chronic boils on the scalp, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Chronic boils on the scalp, fullness of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea,
feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal
itching, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
1356
Toxic Heat in the head
Acute boils on the scalp, redness, pain and swelling of the scalp,
headache, swollen glands, red and swollen tonsils, aversion to
cold, fever, thirst, tongue that is Red on the front with red points
and a thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Erosion Of The Scalp
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Erosion of the scalp with itching and oozing of fluid, fullness of
the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Ulcers On The Scalp
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Liver-Fire
Chronic ulcers on the scalp, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Chronic ulcers on the scalp, fullness of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal
itching, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
1357
Heat in the Governing Vessel
Ulcers on the crown of the head, a feeling of heat in the head,
redness of the scalp, headache, insomnia, dark scanty urine, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Floating-Rapid pulse on all three
positions on the left.
Face
Acne
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 77
Damp-Heat in the skin
Facial acne with red, papular eruptions, greasy skin, puffy face,
sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
This is the most common pattern causing acne in young people.
Toxic Heat in the skin
Facial acne with large, red, pustular eruptions that are painful, a
feeling of heat, red face, red eyes, Red tongue with red points and
thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in the skin
Facial acne with large, dark red or purple, pustular eruptions that
are painful, a feeling of heat, dark face, red eyes, Reddish-Purple
tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Overflowing-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Chronic, facial acne with pale-red, papular or vesicular eruptions
which take a long time to come to a head, greasy skin, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Heat in the Stomach and Lungs
Facial acne with small, red, papular eruptions, on the face, chest
and upper back, dry skin, blackheads, red face, a feeling of heat,
1358
Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the skin
Facial acne with large, pale, vesicular eruptions, greasy skin, puffy
face, greasy hair, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Damp-Phlegm with Blood stasis in the skin
Facial acne with large, dark, purple, papular eruptions, dark
complexion, puffy face, dry skin if Blood stasis predominates, or
greasy skin if Damp-Phlegm predominates, Purple and Swollen
tongue, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Disharmony of Penetrating and Directing Vessels
Facial acne that starts with puberty, especially on the chin, greasy
skin, papular eruptions which are aggravated before the period in
girls.
Rather than being a separate pattern causing acne, a disharmony
of the Penetrating and Directing Vessels is the condition
underlying the development of acne at puberty time and one that
continues to be an underlying condition when the acne persists for
several years, especially in women.
 
clinical note
• 
 
When treating acne, I always harmonize the Directing
and Penetrating Vessels, irrespective of the pattern, in
order to balance the hormone levels.
Feeling Of Heat Of The Face
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
A feeling of heat of the face includes menopausal hot flushes.
Liver-Yang rising
A feeling of heat of the face, red face, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
1359
Liver-Fire 
A feeling of heat of the face and head, worse when anxious or
upset, red face, red eyes, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
A feeling of heat of the face, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue
ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of 
heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face in the afternoon and evening, malar
flush, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth
and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in the
evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue,
redder on the tip, no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face in the afternoon or evening, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, dark scanty
urine, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face, redness of the right cheek, cough,
slight breathlessness, feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
1360
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face in the afternoon and evening, malar
flush, dry cough or with scanty, sticky sputum which could be
blood-tinged, dry mouth and throat at night, weak/hoarse voice,
night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a feeling of heat or a low-
grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin body or thin chest,
insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face, worse after eating, burning epigastric
pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul
breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face in the afternoon and evening, dull or
burning epigastric pain, feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with desire to
drink in small sips, dry stools, slight feeling of fullness after
eating, night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue
(or Red centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Spleen
A feeling of heat of the face, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to
drink, a feeling of fullness of the epigastrium, epigastric or
abdominal pain, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness of the body,
nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of
heat, scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the
head, dull-yellow complexion, bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face, red and dry lips, red tip of the nose,
burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, mouth
ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, yellow
1361
complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the face in the afternoon and evening, poor
appetite, poor digestion, retching, gnawing hunger, loss of taste,
slight epigastric pain, dry mouth and lips, dry stools, thin body,
sallow complexion with red tip of the nose, night sweating, malar
flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating
and transversal cracks on the sides, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Yin Fire
A feeling of heat of the face but cold limbs, slightly red face or pale
face with a floating red colour on the cheeks, intermittent sore
throat, dry mouth, dry lips, mouth ulcers, exhaustion, poor
appetite, poor digestion, weak limbs, Pale tongue, Weak or
Overflowing-Empty pulse.
Yin Fire is a pathological Minister Fire that arises when the
Original Qi (
Yuan Qi
 
) becomes depleted from overwork. Since the
Minister Fire and the Original Qi reside in the same place, the
pathological Minister Fire ‘robs’ the Original Qi and rises to the
head. This pattern is treated by tonifying the Original Qi and
lightly clearing Heat; the representative prescription is Bu Zhong
Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
 
.
 
clinical note
• 
 
In women, a feeling of heat of the face by no means
always indicates Heat. In women, a feeling of heat of the
face contradicting other symptoms and signs is very
common. In particular, it may be due to:
– 
 
a simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin
and Kidney-Yang
– 
 
Empty-Heat from Blood deficiency
– 
 
Yin Fire.
1362
Facial Pain
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Facial pain such as in trigeminal neuralgia is often due to
invasion of Wind in the channels of the face. This is an invasion of
Wind purely in the channels of the face and it is not accompanied
by the symptoms of invasion of Wind in the Lung Defensive-Qi
system (as in common cold and influenza). The pattern of Wind in
the channels causing facial pain may be associated with any of the
other patterns listed; for example, the association of invasion of
Wind in the channels of the face with Yin deficiency is a common
cause of facial pain, especially in the elderly.
Invasion of Wind-Cold in the channels
Facial pain in repeated bouts, spastic, unbearable pain, face
becoming ashen-pale during a bout of pain, aggravated by
exposure to cold and alleviated by heat, Pale tongue, Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat in the channels
Facial pain with a burning sensation in repeated bouts, stabbing,
unbearable pain, pain in nose and lips, touching the face may
suddenly provoke the pain, the pain is more often along the
central axis of the face rather than on the right and left sides, face
becomes red during a bout of pain, sweating, pain alleviated by
exposure to cold and aggravated by exposure to heat, a feeling of
heat, thirst, yellow tongue coating, Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Burning facial pain that comes and goes according to emotional
moods, pain aggravated by exposure to heat, red face, bloodshot
eyes, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Damp-Heat
Severe pain in the cheeks and forehead accompanied by a sticky
1363
yellow or greenish nasal discharge, epigastric fullness, a sticky
taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, a feeling of heat, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Chronic, dull facial pain that is aggravated by overexertion and
alleviated by rest, pale face, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Blood stasis 
Stabbing facial pain, dark complexion, headache, purple lips, dark
rings under the eyes, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
This is Blood stasis affecting the channels of the face, which may
occur against a background of Heart- or Liver-Blood deficiency.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Facial pain, malar flush, dry mouth with no desire to drink, a
feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and internal Wind 
Facial pain aggravated by exposure to wind, malar flush, dry
mouth with no desire to drink, a feeling of heat in the evening,
night sweating, vertigo, facial tics, tremor, Stiff, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty, Rapid and slightly Wiry pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Facial pain, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a
feeling of heat, red face, swelling of the face, dark rings under the
eyes, greasy skin, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in
the throat, expectoration of yellow sputum, dizziness, nausea, Red
and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
1364
Yin deficiency with Phlegm-Heat 
Facial pain, malar flush, dry mouth with no desire to drink, a
feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, 
a feeling of heat, red
face, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, swelling of
the face, greasy skin, dizziness, nausea, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, sputum in the throat, Red, Swollen tongue with coating,
Floating-Empty or Fine and slightly Slippery pulse.
 
clinical note
• 
 
In the elderly with facial pain (often trigeminal
neuralgia), Yin deficiency is nearly always the
background for an invasion of Wind.
Numbness Of The Face
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Blood deficiency 
Mild numbness of the face, dull-pale complexion, dull headache,
blurred vision, dizziness, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organs involved
(which may be the Liver or Heart).
Liver-Wind 
Unilateral numbness of the face, tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or
Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Numbness of the face, bleeding gums, burning epigastric pain,
intense thirst with desire to drink cold liquids, mental
restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, dry stools, sour
regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a
feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red with a thick, dry,
dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
1365
Wind-Phlegm 
Numbness of the face, deviation of the mouth, slurred speech,
severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Numbness of the face with a sudden onset and short duration,
deviation of eye and mouth, Floating pulse.
Oedema Of The Face
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Lung-Qi deficiency
Oedema of the face and hands, slight shortness of breath, slight
cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Oedema of the face, abdomen and legs, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, slight depression,
tendency to obesity, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, oedema, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Wind-Water invading the Lungs
Oedema of the face and hands with sudden onset, bright-shiny
complexion, scanty and pale urination, aversion to wind, fever,
cough, slight breathlessness, sticky white tongue coating, Floating-
Slippery pulse.
Tic
Observation,
 
Chapter 4
1366
‘Tic’ indicates an involuntary, recurrent twitching of facial
muscles, usually involving the eyes or mouth, or both.
Liver-Wind
Severe eye tic, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of limbs, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency leading to Liver-Wind 
Occasional facial tic, slight tremor of the head/hand, dizziness,
blurred vision, unilateral numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and
Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind and Phlegm 
Facial tic, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
This condition is more common in old people.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Eye tic, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
Wiry pulse.
External invasion of Wind-Cold in the channels of the
face
Short-lasting tic with sudden onset, stiff neck, occipital headache,
Floating-Tight pulse.
Deviation Of Eye And Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapters 4
 
and 
5
Liver-Wind 
Deviation of eye and mouth, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
1367
tongue, Wiry pulse.
This corresponds to Wind-stroke.
Liver-Wind and Phlegm 
Deviation of eye and mouth, hypertension, tremors, severe
dizziness, tinnitus, headache, numbness of limbs, tics, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, expectoration of sputum, Deviated or Stiff
and Swollen tongue with a sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
This condition is more common in old people.
External invasion of Wind-Cold in the channels of the
face
Sudden deviation of mouth and eye, incomplete closure of the eye,
inability to raise the eyebrow. This corresponds to facial paralysis
(Bell’s palsy) and it is due to an invasion of Wind-Cold, not in the
Lung’s Defensive-Qi portion (as in the common cold and
influenza), but in the channels of the face.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Intermittent deviation of eye and mouth depending on emotional
moods, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
Wiry pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Slight deviation of eye and mouth, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dullpale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Toxic Heat in the channels of the face
Deviation of mouth only, thirst, bitter taste, swelling and pain of
the face, toothache, headache, red eyes, Red tongue with red
points with thick, sticky, yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
1368
Facial Paralysis
Observation,
 
Chapter 4
External invasion of Wind-Cold in the channels of the
face
Facial paralysis with a sudden onset, incomplete closure of the eye,
inability to raise eyebrow.
This corresponds to facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy) and it is due to
an invasion of Wind-Cold, not in the Lung’s Defensive-Qi portion
(as in the common cold and influenza), but in the channels of the
face.
Papular/Macular Eruptions
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Lung-Heat
Papular eruptions on the face and nose, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat
Macular eruptions on the face, red face, a feeling of heat of the
head, thirst, insomnia, agitation, heavy periods, Red tongue,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Swelling And Redness Of The Face
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Invasion of Toxic Heat
Acute swelling and redness of the face, swollen tonsils, swollen
glands, swelling of the parotid gland, aversion to cold, fever,
headache, tongue Red in the front with red points and thick, sticky
yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1369
Swelling, Redness And Pain Of The Cheeks
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Toxic Heat in the face
Swelling, redness and pain of the cheeks, thirst, bitter taste,
toothache, headache, red eyes, Red tongue with 
red points with
thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Ulcers Below The Zygomatic Arch
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Toxic Heat in the Stomach
Ulcers below the zygomatic arch, swelling and redness of the
cheeks, red and swollen tonsils, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with a thick, sticky yellow coating and red
points, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lines On The Face
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
Blood deficiency 
Lines on the face, dry skin of the face, dry scalp and hair, dry eyes,
floaters, blurred vision, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty
menstruation, Pale and Thin tongue, Fine or Choppy pulse.
Heat with Dryness
Lines on the face, dry skin of the face, dry scalp and hair, red face,
dry mouth, dry eyes, thirst, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
1370
CHAPTER 56
 
FACE COLOUR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
WHITE/PALE
YELLOW
RED
BLUISH/GREENISH
PURPLE
DARK
SALLOW
BLUSHING
WHITE/PALE
Observation,
 
Chapter 3
Qi deficiency
Slightly pale face, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, slight shortness of breath, Empty pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be especially the Lungs, Spleen or Heart.
Yang deficiency
1371
Bright-pale complexion, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, slight shortness of breath, spontaneous sweating, cold
limbs, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Yang deficiency of any organ, but especially the Stomach,
Spleen, Kidneys, Lungs and Heart, may cause a bright-pale
complexion.
Blood deficiency
Dull-pale complexion, blurred vision, poor memory, dizziness,
scanty periods, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood deficiency of the Heart, Spleen or Liver may cause a dull-
pale complexion.
Full-Cold
Greyish-pale complexion, abdominal pain, epigastric pain cold
limbs, pain alleviated by exposure to heat and by drinking warm
drinks, and aggravated by exposure to cold and by drinking cold
drinks, thick white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
This is Full-Internal-Cold, which may affect the Stomach, Spleen,
Liver channel and Intestines.
Collapse of Yang
Greyish-pale complexion, sweating on the forehead like oil beads,
chilliness, cold limbs, weak breathing, 
absence of thirst, profuse
pale urination or incontinence of urine, loose stools, incontinence
of faeces, mental confusion or unconsciousness, Pale-Short and
wet tongue, Deep-Minute pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Greyish-pale complexion, aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy
throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose with clear
watery discharge, sneezing, occipital headache, body aches, thin
white tongue coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Heat stagnating in the Interior (True Heat-False Cold)
Greyish-pale complexion, dark face, bright eyes with lustre, red dry
lips, irritability, strong body, noisy breathing, loud voice, thirst
1372
with a desire to drink cold fluids, scanty-dark urine, constipation,
burning sensation in the anus, hot chest, cold limbs, aversion to
heat, mental restlessness, thirst, dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Do not be surprised if, in women, a pale face has
some redness on the cheeks. This may be due to:
— 
 
simultaneous Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang deficiency
— 
 
Empty-Heat from Blood deficiency
— 
 
Yin Fire.
YELLOW
Observation,
 
Chapter 3
Dampness
Yellow complexion (which may be bright if Dampness is combined
with Heat), a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, epigastric
fullness, a sticky taste, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating, Slippery or
Soggy pulse.
Chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dull yellow, greyish-yellow complexion, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Chronic Damp-Heat
Ash-like yellow complexion, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, sticky taste, Red tongue
with sticky-yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1373
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dull-yellow or greyish-yellow complexion, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation,
Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with stagnation of Liver-Qi
Greyish yellow complexion, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
pulse Weak on the right and Wiry on the left.
Damp-Heat with Blood stasis
Bluish yellow complexion, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, sticky taste, purple lips and
nails, Reddish-purple tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Dry yellow complexion, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach Empty-Heat
Thin, dry, yellow complexion, malar flush, poor appetite, poor
digestion, retching, loss of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth
and lips, dry stools, thin body, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Dry yellow complexion, burning epigastric/abdominal pain,
excessive hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst,
dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, Red tongue with dry
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1374
Blood stasis
Very dull and sallow yellow complexion, mental restlessness,
abdominal pain, Purple tongue, Firm pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Floating, reddish-yellow complexion, aversion to cold, fever, cough,
sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Dampness
Floating yellow complexion, aversion to cold, fever, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
Floating-Slippery pulse.
RED
Observation,
 
Chapter 3
Full-Heat
Bright-red face, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat of any organ, but especially the Heart, Lungs, Liver and
Stomach, may cause a red face.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating,
mental restlessness, five-palm heat, Red tongue without coating,
Rapid and Floating-Empty pulse.
This may be Empty-Heat of any organ but especially of the
Stomach, Heart, Lungs, Kidneys, Spleen and Liver.
Liver-Yang rising
Slightly red face, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
1375
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat
Red face, swollen face, greasy skin, epigastric fullness, sticky taste,
thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, a feeling of heat, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Floating red colour on cheekbones, dull-pale complexion, blurred
vision, dizziness, scanty periods, amenorrhoea, insomnia, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Empty-Heat deriving from Blood deficiency is usually seen only
in women and, although it may cause the cheekbones to become
red, it is not usually associated with other Heat symptoms such as
thirst or feeling of heat.
Yin Fire
Slightly red face or pale face with a floating red colour on the
cheeks, intermittent and recurrent feeling of heat in the face but
cold limbs, intermittent sore throat, dry mouth, dry lips, mouth
ulcers, exhaustion, poor appetite, poor digestion, weak limbs, Pale
tongue, Weak or Overflowing-Empty pulse.
Yin Fire is a pathological Minister Fire that arises when the
Original Qi (
Yuan Qi
 
) becomes depleted from overwork. Since the
Minister Fire and the Original Qi reside in the same place, the
pathological Minister Fire ‘robs’ the Original Qi and rises to the
head. This pattern is treated by tonifying the Original Qi and
lightly clearing Heat; the representative prescription is Bu Zhong
Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
 
.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red face, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or
runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the
sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1376
Deficient Yang floating
Malar flush, feeling of heat, desire to remove clothes, thirst with a
desire to drink warm liquids, slight shortness of breath, cold
sweating, cold limbs, pale urine, pale lips, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
This condition is quite rare and is due to the Yang being so weak
that the little Yang there is floats upwards.
BLUISH/GREENISH
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 3
‘Bluish/greenish’ is a translation of the Chinese word 
qing
 
,
which, unfortunately, may mean both ‘green’ and ‘blue’, leading to
difficulties in translating this term.
Full-Cold
Bright-bluish face, abdominal pain, epigastric pain, facial pain,
pain alleviated by exposure to heat and aggravated by exposure to
cold, cold limbs, white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
Heart and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dull-bluish face, ashen face, greenish lips, palpitations, shortness
of breath, discomfort of the chest, cold limbs, oedema, backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, pale abundant urination, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Chronic pain
Dull-greenish face, abdominal pain, epigastric pain, facial pain,
painful periods.
A chronic pain from any origin or organ may cause the face to
become dull greenish.
Lung and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dull-greenish-purplish face, breathlessness that is worse on
exertion, weak voice, cold limbs, sweating, pale frequent urination,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1377
Liver-Qi stagnation
Very slightly greenish complexion especially around the mouth,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Greenish face, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue,
Wiry pulse.
PURPLE
Observation,
 
Chapter 3
Blood stasis from Cold
Bluish-purple face, chest pain, palpitations, abdominal pain,
Bluish-Purple tongue, Tight pulse.
Other manifestation depend on the organ involved, which may
be the Heart, Liver, Lungs or Intestines.
Blood stasis from Heat
Reddish-purple face, a feeling of heat, chest pain, abdominal pain,
Reddish-Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
This is usually due to Liver-Blood stasis associated with Blood-
Heat.
DARK
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 3
A ‘dark’ complexion is a mixture of a greyish-purplish colour,
usually without ‘spirit’, that is, dull in appearance; in extreme
cases, it can be very dark, almost black.
Severe Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dark complexion, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, feeling cold, weak
knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, depression, exhaustion,
1378
abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Severe Blood stasis
Dark complexion, purple nails, dry skin, purple lips, abdominal or
chest pain, painful periods, Purple tongue, Choppy pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Dark complexion, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, poor
memory, loose teeth, premature greying of hair, infertility, sterility,
Leather pulse.
SALLOW
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 3
A ‘sallow’ complexion indicates a pale-yellowish colour of the
skin that is dull and without lustre.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Sallow complexion, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, abdominal fullness,
a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested
food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal headache, excessive vaginal
discharge, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency
Sallow complexion, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood deficiency 
Dull-sallow complexion, dizziness, blurred vision, insomnia,
scanty periods, numbness/tingling of limbs, tiredness, Pale-Thin
tongue, Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
1379
may be the Liver, Heart or Spleen.
Blood stasis
Very dull-sallow complexion, mental restlessness, abdominal pain,
Purple tongue, Firm pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
BLUSHING
Heart-Heat
Blushing easily when excited or anxious, palpitations, a feeling of
heat, anxiety, insomnia, tongue with Red tip, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Blushing easily when excited or anxious, palpitations, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
bothered’, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids,
a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue, redder on the tip, no coating, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Blushing easily when upset, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Blushing easily after drinking alcohol, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Blushing easily when worried, dry cough or with scanty, sticky
1380
sputum, which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at
night, weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a
feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat,
thin body or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
1381
CHAPTER 57
 
EARS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
TINNITUS/DEAFNESS
ITCHY EARS
EARACHE
BLEEDING FROM THE EARS
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
ABNORMAL SIZE
Swollen ears
Contracted ears
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
SORES ON THE EAR
WARTS ON THE EAR
ABNORMAL HELIX COLOUR
Yellow
Pale
Bluish-greenish (
Qing
 
)
Dark
Red
1382
RED BACK OF THE EAR
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
SWELLING AND REDNESS OF THE CONCHA
TINNITUS/DEAFNESS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Kidney deficiency
Tinnitus/deafness with gradual onset, tinnitus with low rushing
sound, dizziness, backache, tiredness.
Other symptoms and signs, including tongue and pulse, depend
on whether there is Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Liver-Yang rising
Tinnitus/deafness, tinnitus with a high-pitched sound, headaches,
dizziness, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Tinnitus/deafness with sudden onset, tinnitus with high-pitched
sound, red face, bloodshot eyes, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire affecting the Liver channel
Tinnitus/deafness with sudden onset, tinnitus with high-pitched
sound, thirst, bitter taste, red face, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, sputum in the throat, catarrh, Red tongue with redder sides,
or Swollen with a sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Tinnitus/deafness with gradual onset, tinnitus with low-pitched
sound, dizziness, insomnia, anxiety, palpitations, night sweating,
1383
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Tinnitus/deafness with gradual onset, tinnitus with low-pitched
sound, dizziness, poor memory, palpitations, insomnia, anxiety,
dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of Gathering-
Qi) 
Tinnitus/deafness with gradual onset, tinnitus with low-pitched
sound, tiredness, palpitations, depression, shortness of breath,
Pale tongue, pulse Weak on both Front positions.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Tinnitus/deafness with gradual onset, tinnitus with low-pitched
sound, dizziness, blurred vision, insomnia, poor memory, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat (in the Lesser-Yang channels)
Sudden Tinnitus/deafness, tinnitus with high-pitched sound,
headache, stiff neck, sore throat, burning eyes, slight sweating,
fever, aversion to cold, tongue Red in the front or sides, Floating-
Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, tinnitus from a Deficiency is easier
to treat than one from a Fullness.
ITCHY EARS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Itchy ears, earache, dizziness, tinnitus, headache, sticky taste,
hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
1384
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes, irritability, a
feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Itchy ears with sudden onset, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red
sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Blood deficiency with internal Wind 
Itchy ears, dryness of the skin around the ears, crusts on the ear,
blurred vision, dizziness, giddiness, numbness, Pale and Stiff
tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Itchy ears, dizziness, tinnitus, night-sweating, dry mouth with a
desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory, dark scanty
urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
EARACHE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Invasion of Wind-Heat 
Earache with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red
sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Earache, yellow discharge from the ear, dizziness, tinnitus,
hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes, irritability, a
feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1385
Liver-Fire
Earache with sudden onset, worse with pressure, headaches,
dizziness, red face, bloodshot eyes, thirst, bitter taste, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Severe earache, headache, tinnitus, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Chronic earache in children is always due to residual
pathogenic factor (usually Damp-Heat) after repeated
upper respiratory or ear infections treated with
antibiotics.
BLEEDING FROM THE EARS
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Bleeding from the ears, earache, yellow discharge from the ear,
dizziness, tinnitus, headache, hypochondrial pain, fullness and
distension, nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow
complexion and eyes, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral
or bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Sudden bleeding from the ear, red face, bloodshot eyes, thirst,
bitter taste, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Bleeding from the ear that comes and goes, scanty amount, ear not
swollen or red, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with
a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory, dark scanty
1386
urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Occasional, slight bleeding from the ear, poor appetite, tiredness,
slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Invasion of Wind-Heat 
Yellow discharge from the ear, earache, aversion to cold, fever, sore
throat, headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red
sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Sticky, thick yellow discharge from the ear, earache, tinnitus,
dizziness, headache, hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension,
nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and
eyes, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick,
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Thin discharge from the ear that comes and goes, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small
sips, backache, poor memory, dark scanty urine, five-palm heat,
malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Foul-smelling yellow discharge from the ear, severe earache,
irritability, headache, a feeling of heat, fever, bitter taste, sticky
taste, Red tongue with redder sides and red points with sticky
yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1387
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Slight discharge from the ear without pain, tiredness, loose stools,
a feeling of heaviness, a feeling of fullness, Pale tongue with white
sticky coating, Soft pulse.
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Phlegm
Excessive wax production, dizziness, a feeling of muzziness of the
head, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heaviness,
sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Excessive wax production, discharge of bright-yellow wax, earache,
headache, hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea,
vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or
bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Excessive wax production, discharge of dull-yellow wax, dizziness,
tinnitus, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, backache, a feeling
of cold, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Excessive ear wax production, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating,
dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor
memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of
heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat with stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
1388
Excessive wax production, earache, occasional discharge of dull
wax, bleeding from the ear, discharge from the ear, Red tongue
with red points and sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
ABNORMAL SIZE
Swollen Ears
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Swollen and red ears, earache, ear discharge, a sticky taste,
hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral
thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Swollen and red ears, earache, thirst, bitter taste, irritability,
headache, unilateral yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Water in the Lungs
Swollen ears with acute onset, oedema of the face and hands,
aversion to cold, fever, headache, white tongue coating, Floating-
Slippery pulse.
Contracted Ears
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Contracted and dry ears, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory,
scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Aftermath of acute Heat in febrile diseases 
1389
Contracted, dry ears, dry mouth, exhaustion, dry skin, dry tongue,
Fine pulse.
Severe Blood stasis in the abdomen with abdominal
masses 
Contracted, dry, dull and dark ears, dry mouth, dry skin,
abdominal pain, loss of weight, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy
pulse.
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Blood stasis
Dry, contracted and dark helix, abdominal pain, chest pain, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organs involved,
which may be the Liver, Heart, Stomach or Intestines.
Blood stasis with Damp-Heat
Dry and contracted helix, abdominal pain, mucus in the stools,
loose stools, Purple tongue with sticky yellow coating, Wiry-
Slippery pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry, dark and contracted helix, tinnitus, dizziness, night sweating,
dry mouth with desire to sip water, backache, poor memory, dark
scanty urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
SORES ON THE EAR
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Sores on the ear, red face, headache, irritability, bitter taste,
dizziness, hypochondrial pain, Red tongue with yellow coating,
1390
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels 
Sores on the ear, earache, alternating chills and fever, irritability,
headache, tongue with Red sides and possibly unilateral white
coating, Floating-Rapid and Wiry pulse.
WARTS ON THE EAR
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Warts on the ear, red face, headache, irritability, dizziness, bitter
taste, hypochondrial pain, Red tongue with yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Warts on the ear, burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a
desire to drink cold liquids, mental restlessness, bleeding gums,
dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, a feeling of heat, tongue
Red with a thick, dry, dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
ABNORMAL HELIX COLOUR
Yellow
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Yellow helix, bitter and sticky taste, earache, hypochondrial pain,
fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats,
yellow complexion and eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, a
feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis deriving from Heat (Liver and Gall-
1391
Bladder)
Dull, dark-yellow helix, earache, hypochondrial pain, thirst, dry
mouth, headache, irritability, Reddish-purple tongue with
unilateral yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Pale
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Yang deficiency
Pale helix, feeling cold, tiredness, cold limbs, loose stools, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Blood deficiency 
Pale, dry helix, dry skin, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness of the
limbs, scanty periods, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Bluish-Greenish (
Qing
 
)
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Blood stasis from Heat
Greenish, dry helix, abdominal pain, chest pain, Reddish-Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Blood stasis from Cold
Bluish, wet helix, abdominal pain, chest pain, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Internal Wind in children 
Greenish helix, tremor, convulsions, fever, opisthotonos, Stiff
tongue, Wiry pulse.
1392
Dark
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Blood stasis
Dark and dry helix, dry mouth, dark complexion, dry skin,
abdominal pain, chest pain, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Blood stasis from Cold
Dark, moist helix, abdominal pain, chest pain, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Chronic Heat
Dark and dry helix, red face, thirst, dry skin, dry mouth, dry stools,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Red
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Lung-Heat
Red helix, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red helix, red face, bitter taste, thirst, palpitations, agitation,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels
Red helix, bitter taste, hypochondrial discomfort, dry throat,
alternation of cold and hot feeling with predominance of the latter,
irritability, tongue with unilateral yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
1393
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder.
Red and swollen helix, bitter and sticky taste, burning on
urination, excessive vaginal discharge, irritability, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, tongue with
Red sides and sticky-yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Red and dry helix, tinnitus, malar flush, dry mouth with a desire to
sip water, dizziness, night sweating, backache, poor memory, dark
scanty urine, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
RED BACK OF THE EAR
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Invasion of Wind-Heat (especially in children) 
Red back of the ear, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red sides/front, Floating-
Rapid pulse.
Measles 
Red back of the ear, papular rash, fever, thirst, sweating, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON
THE EAR
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Lung deficiency with Phlegm-Heat
Distended, red blood vessels on the ear, cough, breathlessness,
expectoration of sticky sputum, weak voice, tiredness, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Pale and Swollen tongue with sticky
1394
coating, pulse Slippery in general but Weak on the right Front
position.
Blood stasis
Distended, purple blood vessels on the ear, dark complexion,
headache, abdominal pain, chest pain, Purple tongue, Wiry or
Choppy pulse. Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ
involved.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Distended, red blood vessels on the ear, earache, dizziness,
tinnitus, hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea,
vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes,
irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral thick,
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Heat
Distended, red blood vessels on the ear, especially on the lobe,
palpitations, feeling of heat, anxiety, insomnia, Red tip of the
tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
SWELLING AND REDNESS OF THE
CONCHA
Observation,
 
Chapter 9
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Swelling and redness of the concha, earache, ear discharge, itchy
ear, headache, hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension,
nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and
eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness,
unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Redness and slight swelling of the concha, earache, dizziness,
1395
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a 
desire to drink in small
sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat,
malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Swelling and redness of the concha, earache, discharge from the
ear, swollen neck glands, headache, thirst, Red tongue with red
points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
1396
CHAPTER 58
 
NOSE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale
Yellow
Red
Bluish-greenish
Reddish-purple
Dark
SNEEZING
BLOCKED NOSE
RUNNY NOSE
ITCHY NOSE
DRY NOSTRILS
NOSEBLEED
NOSE ACHE
NOSE PAIN
SWOLLEN NOSE
BAD SMELL
LOSS OF SENSE OF SMELL
1397
POLYPS
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE NOSTRILS)
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
ABNORMAL COLOUR
Pale
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Stomach and Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Pale tip of the nose, discomfort or dull pain in the epigastrium,
better after eating and better with pressure or massage, no
appetite, preference for warm drinks and foods, vomiting of clear
fluid, absence of thirst, cold and weak limbs, tiredness, pale
complexion, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Pale bridge of the nose, dull-pale face, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids 
Pale and swollen tip of the nose, swollen face, greasy skin,
abdominal fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting or watery
fluids, dry mouth without a desire to drink, shortness of breath,
dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the chest, swelling of the
limbs, expectoration of thin watery sputum, inability to lie down,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery
pulse.
Yellow
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
1398
Damp-Heat in the Spleen
Bright-yellow nose if Heat predominates, dull-yellow nose if
Dampness predominates, greasy skin, fullness of the epigastrium,
epigastric or abdominal pain, sticky 
taste, thirst with no desire to
drink, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness of the body, thirst,
nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of
heat, scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the
head, dull-yellow complexion, bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency with retention of
Dampness
Dull-yellow tip of the nose, dull-pale face, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale or
sallow complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, slight
depression, tendency to obesity, abdominal fullness, a feeling of
heaviness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested food in the
stools, nausea, dull frontal headache, excessive vaginal discharge,
Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Dull, dark-yellow bridge of the nose, dark complexion,
hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and
clotted menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and
lips, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Bright-yellow and dry tip of the nose, burning
epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the nose,
dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty
dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids 
Dull-yellow and swollen tip of the nose, abdominal fullness and
distension, nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a
desire to drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of
1399
oppression of the chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of
thin watery sputum, inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
Red
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Lung-Heat
Red bridge of the nose in its upper part, flaring of nostrils, red
face, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache,
flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Red bridge of the nose in its central part, red face, headache,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Red and dry tip of the nose, thirst, dry lips, dry mouth, burning
epigastric/abdominal abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of
the nose, mouth ulcers, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark
urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red bridge of the nose with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Bluish-Greenish
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
1400
Liver-Blood stasis
Greenish bridge of the nose, dark complexion, headache,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Internal Cold
Bluish bridge of the nose, greyish-pale face, abdominal pain, cold
limbs, a feeling of cold, diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Tight-Slow pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids 
Bluish and swollen tip of the nose, swollen face, abdominal
fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry
mouth without a desire to drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, swelling of the limbs,
expectoration of thin watery sputum, inability to lie down, Swollen
tongue with sticky coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
Reddish-Purple
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Liver-Blood stasis
Reddish-purple bridge of the nose, dark complexion,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Heart-Blood stasis 
Reddish-purple colour on the bridge between the eyes,
palpitations, stabbing or pricking chest pain which may radiate to
the inner aspect of the left arm or to the shoulder, a feeling of
oppression or constriction of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails,
cold hands, tongue entirely Purple or Purple only on the sides in
the chest areas, Choppy or Wiry pulse.
1401
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Dark reddish-purple alae nasi, bleeding gums, stabbing epigastric
pain, vomiting of blood, tongue Purple in the centre, Wiry or
Choppy pulse.
Dark
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Liver-Fire
Dark bridge of the nose, red face, thirst, bitter taste, headaches,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Exhaustion (Xu Lao)
Dark, bluish-purple bridge of the nose, extreme exhaustion, weight
loss, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
SNEEZING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind
Acute sneezing, aversion to cold, fever, body aches, occipital
headache, Floating pulse.
Other manifestations depend on whether it is Wind-Cold or
Wind-Heat.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Chronic sneezing, allergy to house-dust mites or pollen, itchy
nose, tiredness, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak
voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of
cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1402
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic sneezing, allergy to house-dust mites or pollen, worse
after sex, lower backache, cold knees, sensation of cold in the lower
back, feeling cold, weak legs, bright-white complexion, weak
knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear or scanty clear
urination, urination at night, apathy, oedema of lower legs,
infertility in women, loose stools, depression, impotence,
premature ejaculation, low sperm count, cold and thin sperm,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember that sneezing is due not only to the lack of
diffusing of Lung-Qi but also to a deficiency of the
Kidney’s Defensive-Qi system. The Governing Vessel is
also involved as it runs through the nose.
BLOCKED NOSE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind
Acute blocked nose, aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache,
stiff neck, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
Lung and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic blocked nose, pale nose, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of
the limbs, loose stools, slight shortness of breath, weak voice,
slight cough, spontaneous daytime sweating, tendency to catch
colds, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Heat
Blocked nose, dry nose, red nose, cough, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the 
nostrils, thirst, red face,
1403
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Blocked nose, facial pain, sinusitis, dull headache, a feeling of
fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor
appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink,
nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Blocked nose, red and swollen membranes, sticky yellow nasal
discharge, dry throat, bitter taste, red face and ears, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, hypochondrial fullness, unilateral or bilateral
yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Blocked nose with occasional yellow discharge, sinusitis, bitter
taste, fullness/pain pain of the hypochondrium, abdomen or
epigastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching,
mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on urination, dark urine, yellow
complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red tongue with redder sides and
unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Blocked nose, cough, shortness of breath, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, abundant pale urination,
Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Blocked nose, purple and swollen nose bridge with an uneven
surface, headache, chest pain, Purple tongue.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Sinusitis is the most common cause of blocked nose.
1404
In children, this is nearly always due to residual
pathogenic factor (Damp-Heat) from repeated upper
respiratory infections treated with antibiotics.
RUNNY NOSE
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Runny nose with profuse white watery discharge, itchy throat,
acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, cough, slight breathlessness,
stuffed or runny nose with clear watery discharge, sneezing,
occipital headache, body aches, thin white tongue coating,
Floating-Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Runny nose with yellow discharge, acute onset, red nostrils,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Runny nose with sticky yellow, foul-smelling discharge, facial pain,
a feeling of heaviness of the head, sticky taste, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite,
thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools with offensive
odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency with Empty-Cold
Chronic runny nose with white watery discharge, sneezing, slight
shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch cold, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold,
1405
cold limbs, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
This may correspond to allergic rhinitis in Western medicine.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
This may also correspond to allergic rhinitis in Western
medicine.
Toxic Heat in the Lungs and Stomach
Runny nose with yellow, red and swollen nose, bloody discharge,
breathlessness, foul breath, cough, headache, swollen and red face,
epigastric pain, thirst, 
tongue Red with red points and thick, sticky,
dry, dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember: a white watery-runny nasal discharge
indicates allergic rhinitis, whereas a sticky thick
discharge indicates sinusitis.
ITCHY NOSE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind
Itchy nose, sneezing, nasal discharge, itchy throat, aversion to
cold, fever, cough, slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose
with clear watery discharge, sneezing, occipital headache, body
aches, thin white tongue coating, Floating pulse.
Dry-Heat in the Lungs
Itchy and dry nose, dry throat, dry cough, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, dry mouth and
throat, red face, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-
1406
Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Lungs
Itchy nose, painful and swollen nostrils, mental restlessness, red
nose, skin spots (papules), headache, cough, slight breathlessness,
a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red
tongue with red points in the front and a sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid-Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Spleen channel
Itchy nose with a sticky yellow discharge, painful and red tip of the
nose, facial pain, a feeling of heaviness of the head, fullness of the
epigastrium, epigastric or abdominal pain, sticky taste, thirst with
no desire to drink, poor appetite, thirst, nausea, vomiting, loose
stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine,
headache with a feeling of heaviness of the head, dull-yellow
complexion, bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Chronic itchy nose, white watery nasal discharge, sneezing, slight
shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Lung-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency (Governing
Vessel deficient)
Chronic itchy nose, white watery nasal discharge, sneezing, allergic
rhinitis, allergic asthma, history of childhood eczema, abundant
pale urination, lower backache, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
This is often seen in atopic individuals suffering from allergic
rhinitis and it corresponds to what I call a deficiency of the
Defensive-Qi systems of the Lungs and Kidneys.
Nose Childhood Nutritional Impairment 
1407
Itchy nose, scabs or ulcers on the nose, a watery yellow nasal
discharge, dry skin, hot hands and feet, itchy nostrils, a tendency
for the child to pick the nose.
DRY NOSTRILS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 7
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 35
Dryness injuring the Lungs
Dry nostrils, dry throat, dry cough, blocked nose, itchy nose, dry
tongue, pulse Fine on the right Front position.
Lung-Heat
Dry and red nostrils, itchy nose, flaring of nostrils, epistaxis, red
face, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache,
flaring of nostrils, thirst, Red tongue with yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Dry and red nostrils, epistaxis, crusts around the nostrils, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dry nostrils, itchy nose, dry cough or with scanty, sticky sputum
which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at night,
weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a feeling
of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin
body or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Dry nostrils, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, dull
or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire
1408
to drink in small sips, dry stools, a slight feeling of full-ness after
eating, night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue
(or Red centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Lung and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dry and itchy nostrils, dry crusts on the nostrils, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, slight depression,
tendency to obesity, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak
voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking,
tendency to catch colds, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse,
especially on the right side.
Blood stasis
Dry nostrils, dry nose bridge, thirst without a desire to swallow,
headache, dark rings under the eyes, Purple tongue.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Dry nostrils, acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Dryness
Dry nostrils, acute onset, dry cough, dry throat, aversion to cold,
fever, dry throat, tickly throat, dry nose, discomfort of the chest,
thin, dry white tongue coating, Floating pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Lungs
Dry nostrils, swollen and red nose, flaring of the nostrils, cough
with expectoration of bloody sputum, fever, chest pain, mental
restlessness, cough, breathlessness, a feeling of heat, thirst, red
face, Red tongue with red points in the front and thick, sticky, dry,
dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1409
NOSEBLEED
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs
Nosebleed often induced by emotional stress, bloodshot eyes,
breathlessness, asthma, a feeling of fullness and distension of the
chest and hypochondrium, cough with a yellow or blood-tinged
sputum, headache, dizziness, red face, thirst, bitter taste, scanty
dark urine, constipation, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry pulse.
Acute Lung-Heat
Nosebleed, flapping of the alae nasi, flaring of nostrils, red face,
cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, thirst,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic nosebleed with pale blood, often induced by overwork,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight depression, tendency to obesity, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Nosebleed with dark-red blood, red nose, bleeding gums, burning
epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids,
mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry
stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting soon after
eating, a feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red with a
thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic nosebleed with scanty bleeding, dizziness, tinnitus,
vertigo, poor memory, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry
mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening,
malar flush, menopausal hot flushes, thirst with desire to sip
fluids, lower backache, ache in bones, nocturnal emissions with
1410
dreams, constipation, scanty dark urine, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, depression, anxiety, insomnia, excessive
menstrual bleeding, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Nosebleed with dark blood, which may be associated with the
period in women, dark bridge of the nose, headache,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Nosebleed, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or
runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the
sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Residual Dry-Heat in the Lungs
Slight nosebleed, dry cough, a feeling of heat, dry throat, chest
pain, tongue Red in the front and dry, Overflowing-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Collapse of both Yin and Yang
Profuse unstoppable nosebleed, bleeding gums, macules, blood in
the urine, profuse sweating like oily beads, ashen-grey face, mouth
open, cold limbs, hands open, incontinence of urine,
unconsciousness, weak breathing, Pale-Short tongue, Scattered-
Minute pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
The Xi-Cleft points are good to stop bleeding. In the
case of the nose, LU-6 Kongzui is applicable.
NOSE ACHE
1411
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Nose ache, runny nose, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat,
stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body
aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly
Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid
pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Nose ache, sticky yellow nasal discharge, red nose, barking cough
with profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
thirst, insomnia, agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Nose ache, watery nasal discharge, decreased sense of smell,
sneezing, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, slight shortness of
breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating,
dislike of speaking, tendency to catch colds, dislike of cold, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse, especially on the right side.
NOSE PAIN
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind
Nose pain, runny nose, sneezing, aversion to cold, fever, headache,
stiff neck, Floating pulse. Other symptoms and signs depend on
whether it is Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat.
Lung and Stomach-Heat
Nose pain, blocked nose, red nose, nose bleed, cough, slight
1412
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
thirst, red face, burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach channel Damp-Heat
Nose pain, sticky yellow nasal discharge, facial pain, redness of the
nose and forehead, blocked nose, sticky yellow tongue coating.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Nose pain, dryness and a feeling of heat of the nose, scabs on the
nose, red nose, malar flush, dry cough or with scanty, sticky
sputum which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at
night, weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, a feeling of
heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin body
or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe nose pain, nosebleed with dark blood, which may be
associated with the period in women, dark nose 
bridge, headache,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Carcinoma of the nose
Nose pain extending to the head, nosebleed with a swelling of the
nasal mucosa.
SWOLLEN NOSE
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Swollen nose, especially the tip, red nose, sticky yellow nasal
discharge, itchy nose, spots on the nose, a feeling of heaviness
1413
especially of the head, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, thirst without a
desire to drink, nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling
of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Swollen and red nose, especially in its upper part, flaring of the
nostrils, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache,
thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Swollen and red bridge of the nose, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Swollen and red bridge of the nose, especially in the area between
the eyes, red face, bitter taste, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with redder
tip and yellow coating, Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Swollen bridge of the nose, especially its upper part, palpitations,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency
to be easily startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot
and bothered’, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip
fluids, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating,
five-palm heat, Red tongue, redder on the tip, no coating, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Swollen nose, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory, hardness
of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a
1414
feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, lower backache, ache in
bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, scanty dark
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Swollen nose, especially on the tip and alae nasi (outside of the
nostrils), greasy skin, chronic cough coming in bouts with profuse
white sticky sputum that is easy to expectorate, white pasty
complexion, a feeling of oppression in the chest, shortness of
breath, dislike of lying down, wheezing, nausea, Swollen tongue
with a sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Lungs
Swelling of the nose, spots (red papules) on the nose, whole nose
feels hard to touch, pain in the nose, purulent spots on the head
appearing 3 to 5 days after the swelling of the nose, flaring of the
nostrils, fever, headache, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of
heat, chest ache, thirst, red face, Red tongue with red points and
thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat at Nutritive-Qi or Blood level
Swollen nose, painful nose, top of the nose feels hard to touch, tip
of the nose oozing pus, red and swollen nose, dark macules, red
cheeks, lips and eyes, fever at night, mental confusion, thirst at
night, tremor of the limbs, Deep-Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty-Rapid pulse.
Heat Childhood Nutritional Impairment 
Swelling of the nose, spots on the nose, nose pain, itching of the
nose, crusts on the nose, epistaxis, poor appetite, headache, loose
stools, thin body, Red tongue with yellow coating, Rapid pulse.
Worms in children 
Swollen and itchy nose in children, white vesicles on the face,
1415
sallow complexion, emaciation, small white spots inside the lips,
purple spots inside the eyelids, loss of appetite or a desire to eat
strange objects (such as wax, leaves, raw rice), abdominal pain,
itchy anus.
BAD SMELL
‘Bad smell’ refers to the subjective sensation of a bad smell in the
nose when breathing in.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Bad smell in the nose, blocked nose, yellow nasal discharge, facial
pain, swollen face, barking cough with profuse, sticky yellow or
green sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, thirst, insomnia,
agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat
Bad smell in the nose, blocked nose, yellow nasal discharge,
sinusitis, facial pain, dull frontal headache, a feeling of heaviness
of the head, epigastric fullness, sticky taste, tiredness, slight
shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Soggy pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder and Liver
Bad smell in the nose, sticky yellow nasal discharge, facial pain,
fullness/pain of the hypochondrium, abdomen or epigastrium,
bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, feeling of heaviness of the body,
yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain,
burning on urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes,
vomiting, Red tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral
sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat
1416
Bad smell in the nose, slight nasal discharge, crusts on the nostrils,
dull frontal headache, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale or sallow complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, abdominal fullness, a feeling
of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, thirst without a desire
to drink, undigested food in the stools, nausea, excessive vaginal
discharge, Pale tongue with sticky yellow coating, Soggy pulse.
LOSS OF SENSE OF SMELL
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Sudden loss of sense of smell, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red
sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Gradual loss of sense of smell, runny nose with white watery
discharge, tiredness, weak voice, tendency to catch colds, poor
appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Gradual loss of sense of smell, pale nose, tiredness, poor appetite,
loose stools, palpitations, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Loss of sense of smell, blocked nose, yellow nasal discharge,
headache, hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea,
vomiting, inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or
bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Loss of sense of smell, yellow nasal discharge, facial pain,
1417
headache, a feeling of heaviness especially of the head, a feeling of
fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor
appetite, thirst without a desire to drink, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
Loss of sense of smell, white nasal discharge, facial pain,
headache, a feeling of heaviness of the head, abdominal fullness,
loose stools, tongue with sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Blood stasis in the Lungs
Gradual loss of sense of smell, blocked nose, pain in the nose,
headache, chest pain, cough, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
POLYPS
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Polyps, sinusitis, facial pain, swollen nose, sticky taste, loss of
sense of smell, a feeling of heaviness especially of the head, a
feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower
abdomen, poor appetite, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea,
loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
Polyps, loss of sense of smell, white nasal discharge, facial pain,
headache, a feeling of heaviness of the head, abdominal fullness,
loose stools, tongue with sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Phlegm in the Lungs
Polyps, cough with expectoration of sticky sputum, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heaviness, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
1418
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE
OF THE NOSTRILS)
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Acute Lung-Heat
Flapping alae nasi, flaring of the nostrils, red face, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, thirst, red face, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slightly flapping alae nasi, dry nose, dry cough or with scanty,
sticky sputum which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat
at night, weak/hoarse hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness,
malar flush, a feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening,
five-palm heat, thin body or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Flapping alae nasi, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat,
stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body
aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly
Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid
pulse.
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Lung-Heat
Ulcers on the nose, red nose, dry nose, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
1419
Ulcers on the nose, swelling of the nose, sticky taste, a feeling of
fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor
appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink,
nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Ulcers on the bridge of the nose, red bridge of the nose, headache,
red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Liver
Ulcers on the bridge of the nose, nose pain, red and swollen nose,
fever, red face, macular eruptions, agitation, headache, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with red points, thick,
sticky, dry dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
Observation,
 
Chapter 7
Stomach-Heat
Papules on the nose, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul 
breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Papules on the nose, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat,
chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat in the Lungs
Dark papules on the nose, cough, coughing of blood, slight
1420
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, Red tongue without coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
1421
CHAPTER 59
 
THROAT
CHAPTER CONTENTS
SORE THROAT
REDNESS OF THE PHARYNX
REDNESS AND SWELLING OF THE PHARYNX
REDNESS AND EROSION OF THE PHARYNX
SWOLLEN TONSILS
PHLEGM IN THE THROAT
GOITRE (SWELLING OF THE SIDES OF THE NECK)
ITCHY THROAT
DRY THROAT
HOARSE VOICE OR LOSS OF VOICE
WHITE PURULENT SPOTS IN THE THROAT
FEELING OF OBSTRUCTION OF THE THROAT
REDNESS ON THE THROAT
SORE THROAT
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Invasion of Wind-Heat
1422
Acute sore throat, itchy throat, shivers, fever, slight sweating,
headache, tongue Red on the sides or front, thin white coating,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic sore throat, dry and red throat, dry cough, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, five-palm heat, dry throat at night, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Chronic sore throat, swollen throat with purulent spots, a feeling
of fullness and pain of the epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness,
facial pain, stuffed nose or thick sticky nasal discharge, thirst
without a desire to drink, nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, a sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Sore throat with severe pain, swollen and red throat, intense thirst
with a desire to drink cold liquids, burning epigastric pain, mental
restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry stools,
sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting soon after eating,
a feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red with a thick, dry
dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Yin
Chronic sore throat, slight pain, often aggravated by exertion,
shortness of breath, tiredness, weak voice, dry cough, Pale tongue,
Weak pulse.
Qi stagnation
Chronic ‘sore throat’ that comes and goes according to the
emotional state, a feeling of a lump in the throat with a feeling of
difficulty in swallowing, irritability, sighing, moodiness,
depression, sadness, Wiry pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Liver or the Lungs.
1423
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Apart from Qi stagnation, the throat area can suffer
only from Heat (Full or Empty) conditions.
• 
 
Remember
 
: Qi stagnation in the throat does not
always derive from the Liver but it may derive also from
the Lungs, Heart and Stomach.
REDNESS OF THE PHARYNX
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Redness of the pharynx, sore throat, aversion to cold, fever, cough,
sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat 
Redness of the pharynx, thirst, foul breath, burning epigastric
pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul
breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Pale-red pharynx, dry cough or with scanty, sticky sputum, dry
mouth and throat at night, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush,
a feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm
heat, thin body, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Pale-red pharynx, dry mouth with desire to sip water, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
1424
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, dark scanty
urine, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
REDNESS AND SWELLING OF THE
PHARYNX
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red and swollen throat with sudden onset, sore throat, swollen
tonsils, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny
nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Lungs and Stomach 
Red and swollen throat with sudden onset, sore throat, a feeling of
obstruction in the throat, Cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of
heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, burning
epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul
breath, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat 
Red and swollen throat with purulent spots, swollen tonsils with
yellow purulent spots, sore throat, fever, thirst, headache, Red
tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid-Slippery pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic slightly swollen throat, red throat, dry throat at night with
desire to drink in small sips, dry cough which is worse in the
evening, thin body, breathlessness on exertion, lower backache,
night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty
1425
urination, a feeling of heat in the evening, five-palm heat, malar
flush, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
REDNESS AND EROSION OF THE
PHARYNX
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Toxic Heat 
Redness, erosion, swelling and severe pain of the pharynx, swollen
tonsils with yellow purulent spots, sore throat, fever, thirst,
headache, Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid-Slippery pulse.
Heat in the Stomach and Intestines 
Erosion, swelling and a yellowish-red colour of the pharynx,
burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea,
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic erosion of the pharynx which comes and goes, slight
swelling, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to drink in
small sips, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue with coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ affected, which
may be Stomach, Lungs or Kidneys.
Severe Yin deficiency 
Chronic erosion of the pharynx which comes and goes, absence of
swelling, dryness of the pharynx with greyish ulcers, dry throat,
thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, night sweating, a feeling
of heat in the evening, tongue dry without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
1426
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be Lungs or Kidneys.
Blood stasis with Phlegm-Heat
Chronic erosion of the pharynx with ulcers with raised, hard edges,
dark, dull colour of the pharynx, sore throat, mental restlessness,
abdominal pain, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in
the throat, a feeling of heat, thirst with no desire to drink, Reddish-
Purple and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Wiry-
Slippery pulse.
SWOLLEN TONSILS
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat 
Acute swelling and redness of the tonsils, in severe cases oozing
pus, severe sore throat, aversion to cold, fever, cough, stuffed or
runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the
sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the throat at the Qi level 
Acute redness and swelling of the tonsils, which ooze pus, severe
sore throat, difficulty in swallowing, high fever, thirst, mental
restlessness, a feeling of heat, dark Red tongue with red points and
thick, dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Stomach and Intestines 
Chronic redness and swelling of the tonsils, thirst, foul breath,
burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea,
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, constipation, Red
tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach and Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic swelling and redness of the tonsils, which come and go,
1427
dry cough or with scanty, sticky sputum, dry mouth and throat
especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in small
sips, dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the
afternoon, night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums,
tiredness, malar flush, thin body, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, a chronic swelling of the tonsils in
children denotes a residual pathogenic factor, usually
Dampness.
• 
 
Heat in the Stomach and Large Intestine may also
cause a chronic swelling of the tonsils in children.
PHLEGM IN THE THROAT
Phlegm with Lung-Qi stagnation
Phlegm in the throat, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
difficulty in swallowing, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
sputum in the throat, tongue slightly Swollen on the sides in the
chest areas, Slippery pulse that is also very slightly Tight on the
right Front position.
Phlegm obstructing the clear orifices
Phlegm in the throat, difficulty in speech, rattling sound in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the 
chest, dull headache as if the
head were full of cotton wool, dizziness, blurred vision,
expectoration of phlegm, nausea, vomiting, Swollen tongue with
sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Phlegm in the throat, a rattling sound in the throat, barking cough
with profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
1428
thirst, insomnia, agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat and Wind 
Phlegm in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling
of heat, thirst with no desire to drink, headache, breathlessness, a
rattling sound in the throat, expectoration of yellow sputum,
dizziness, giddiness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, Red, Swollen
and Stiff tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Scanty phlegm in the throat, weak rattling sound in the throat,
expectoration of white watery phlegm, lower backache, cold and
weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence,
decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension, a desire to lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
When I suspect Phlegm, I always ask patients
whether they experience some phlegm in the throat,
even if only in the morning. If they reply affirmatively, I
take this as a sign of Phlegm, even in the absence of
other symptoms.
GOITRE (
swelling of the sides of the
neck
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 10
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 36
Qi stagnation and Phlegm 
Relatively soft and large goitre with indistinct margins, normal
skin colour, not painful, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a
1429
feeling of a lump in the throat, sighing, sputum in the throat,
hypochondrial distension, irritability, Swollen tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation, Spleen-Qi deficiency and Phlegm 
Large, soft goitre, depression, irritability, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling of oppression or
distension of the chest and hypochondrium, moodiness,
premenstrual tension, nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, tiredness,
poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness, weak limbs, loose stools,
dull-pale complexion, cold limbs, Pale, and Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Soggy or Weak and slightly Slippery or Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire blazing with Phlegm-Heat 
Small or medium-sized goitre that is relatively soft and slippery
under the finger, headache, exophthalmos (bulging eyeballs), red
face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, barking cough
with profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
insomnia, agitation, Swollen and Red tongue with redder sides and
tip, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis 
Relatively hard goitre with distinct margins, nodules on the
thyroid, dark skin colour, painful, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, headache, insomnia, anxiety, chest or abdominal pain,
sputum in the throat, Purple and Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Heart and Liver-Yin deficiency with Phlegm 
 
Chronic goitre that may be large or small and relatively soft with
slow onset, tremor of hands, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, anxiety, dry mouth and throat, night sweating,
dizziness, numbness or tingling of the limbs, blurred vision,
floaters in eyes, dry eyes, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion but with red cheekbones, withered and brittle nails,
1430
dry skin and hair, normal-coloured Swollen tongue without
coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Goitre is by definition due to Phlegm.
ITCHY THROAT
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Invasion of Wind
Itchy throat with sudden onset, aversion to cold, stiff neck, fever,
headache, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Chronic itchy throat, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with a
desire to sip water, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung Dryness
Itchy throat, dry cough, dry skin, dry throat, dry mouth, thirst,
hoarse voice, dry tongue, Fine pulse.
Dryness invading the Lungs
Itchy throat with sudden onset, dry cough, aversion to cold, fever,
dry nose, dry and sore throat, tongue Red in the front with dry,
thin white coating, Floating pulse.
DRY THROAT
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Lung-Yin deficiency
1431
Chronic dry throat, hoarse voice, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat
with desire to sip water, night sweating, tiredness, tongue without
coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Chronic dry throat, dry throat at night with a desire to drink in
small sips, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory,
night sweating, vertigo, lower backache, ache in bones, nocturnal
emissions, constipation, scanty dark urine, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight anxiety, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Chronic dryness of the throat, no appetite or slight hunger but no
desire to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning
epigastric pain, dry mouth especially in the afternoon, thirst but
no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, a slight feeling
of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating in
the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Chronic dryness of the throat, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, insomnia, blurred vision, floaters in the eyes, dry eyes,
diminished night vision, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
dull-pale complexion without lustre but with red cheekbones,
muscular weakness, cramps, withered and brittle nails, very dry
skin and hair, night sweating, depression, a feeling of aimlessness,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty
pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Dry throat with sudden onset, itchy throat, sore throat, aversion to
cold, fever, cough, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1432
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Dry throat, swollen throat, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, foul breath, a feeling of heat, excessive
hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry stools,
scanty dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Dry throat, bitter taste, thirst, blurred vision, hypochondrial pain,
nausea, headache, red eyes, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Lesser-Yang pattern (Six Stages)
Dry throat, bitter taste, hypochondriac fullness and pain,
alternation of chills and feeling of heat with predominance of the
former, irritability, unilateral white tongue coating, Wiry pulse.
Gall-Bladder-Heat pattern (Qi level of Four levels)
Dryness of the throat, thirst, bitter taste, hypochondrial pain,
alternation of chills and feeling of heat with predominance of the
latter, irritability, unilateral yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Wind-Dryness-Heat invading the Lungs
Dry throat with sudden onset, sore throat, itchy throat, aversion to
cold, fever, dry cough, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, dry nose, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
HOARSE VOICE OR LOSS OF VOICE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 36
 
; 
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Chronic hoarse voice, dry throat at night, itchy throat, dry cough
1433
which is worse in the evening, thin body, breathlessness on
exertion, lower backache, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, scanty urination, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Chronic hoarse voice, cough which is dry or with scanty sticky
sputum, weak voice, dry mouth and throat, tickly throat, tiredness,
dislike of speaking, thin body or thin chest, night sweating,
normal-coloured tongue without coating (or with rootless coating)
in the front part, Floating-Empty pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat and Dryness
Hoarse voice with sudden onset, dry throat with sudden onset,
sore throat, itchy throat, aversion to cold, fever, dry cough, stuffed
or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, dry nose, tongue slightly
Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Heat
Hoarse voice, sore throat, a feeling of blockage of the throat,
cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring
of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis and Phlegm
Chronic hoarse voice, sore throat, a feeling of obstruction of the
throat, thickening of the vocal chords, nodules on the vocal chords,
swelling of the throat, headache, chest pain, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, Purple tongue, Wiry
pulse.
WHITE PURULENT SPOTS IN THE
THROAT
1434
Epidemic Toxic Heat on the Exterior 
White purulent spots in the throat, small and with distinct
margins, sore and swollen throat, swollen tonsils, fever, aversion to
cold, headache, body aches, thin white tongue coating, Floating-
Rapid pulse.
Epidemic Toxic Heat in the Interior 
White purulent spots in the throat, large spots which may ooze
blood, red, swollen and sore throat, high fever, profuse sweating,
red face, thirst, mental restlessness, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Turbid Phlegm in the throat
Chronic white purulent spots in the throat, dull-pasty complexion,
mental restlessness, a feeling of oppression of the chest, wheezing,
expectoration of sputum, barking voice, hoarse voice, Swollen
tongue with white coating, Slippery pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency
White purulent spots in the throat, dry throat, dry cough which is
worse in the evening, dry throat and mouth, thin body,
breathlessness on exertion, lower backache, night sweating,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty urination, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
White purulent spots in the throat, dry throat at night, dry cough
which is worse in the evening, thin body, breathlessness on
exertion, lower backache, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, scanty urination, a feeling of heat in the
evening, five-palm heat, malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in
small sips, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Heat in the Lungs and Stomach
White purulent spots in the throat, swollen throat, painful throat,
1435
swollen tonsils, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat,
chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, burning epigastric
pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, 
foul
breath, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
White purulent spots in the throat, lower backache, cold knees, a
sensation of cold in the lower back, a feeling of cold, weak legs,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at night, apathy,
oedema of lower legs, infertility in women, loose stools,
depression, impotence, premature ejaculation, low sperm count,
cold and thin sperm, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
FEELING OF OBSTRUCTION OF THE
THROAT
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Liver-Qi stagnation
A feeling of lump in the throat that comes and goes according to
the emotional state, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Lung and Stomach-Qi stagnation
A feeling of lump in the throat that comes and goes according to
the emotional state, sadness, worry, grief, depression, a slight
feeling of tightness, oppression or distension of the chest, slight
breathlessness, difficulty in swallowing, sighing, irritability,
epigastric pain and distension, belching, nausea, vomiting, hiccup,
tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse slightly
Wiry on the right.
1436
Qi stagnation and Phlegm
A feeling of lump in the throat, phlegm in the throat that needs
frequent clearing, expectoration of scanty sputum, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, irritability, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
A feeling of lump in the throat, dry throat at night, tickly throat,
cough which is dry or with scanty sticky sputum, weak/hoarse
voice, tiredness, dislike of speaking, thin body or thin chest, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating (or with
rootless coating) in the front part, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency 
A slight feeling of lump in the throat, dry throat at night,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night
sweating, vertigo, lower backache, ache in bones, nocturnal
emissions, constipation, scanty dark urine, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight anxiety, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, a feeling of obstruction in the
throat strongly indicates emotional stress with Qi
stagnation.
• 
 
Note that this is not always related to the Liver and
may be related also to Lungs or Heart.
• 
 
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang is for stagnation of Lung-Qi in
the throat from worry or grief.
REDNESS ON THE THROAT
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 10
By ‘redness on the throat’ is meant not a redness inside the
throat (pharynx) but a redness on the skin overlying the throat.
1437
Heart-Fire
Redness on the throat that gets worse when patient talks, thirst,
bitter taste, palpitations, anxiety, red face, Red tongue with redder
tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
‘Floating’ redness on the throat, dry mouth and throat,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, mental restlessness, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar
flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip
and without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Redness on the throat, dry throat, thirst, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
‘Floating’ redness on the throat, malar flush, dry cough or with
scanty, sticky sputum, dry mouth and throat at night, night
sweating, tiredness, a feeling of 
heat or a low-grade fever in the
evening, five-palm heat, thin body, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
‘Floating’ redness on the throat, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, red face, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Redness on the throat, thirst, bitter taste, red face, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, headache, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry-yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I have noticed that a redness on the throat appearing
1438
as the patient talks, indicates severe anxiety with Heat
or Empty-Heat.
1439
CHAPTER 60
 
MOUTH,
TONGUE, TEETH,
GUMS, LIPS,
PALATE AND
PHILTRUM
CHAPTER CONTENTS
MOUTH
Mouth ulcers
Cold sores
Cracked corners of the mouth
Itching around the mouth
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth
Trembling mouth
Mouth open
1440
Deviation of the mouth
TONGUE
Itchy tongue
Painful tongue
Numbness of the tongue
Tongue ulcers
TEETH
Toothache
Tooth cavities
Loose teeth
Grinding teeth
Plaque
Dry and white teeth
Dry and dull teeth
Yellow and dry teeth
Grey teeth
Upper teeth moist and lower teeth dry
GUMS
Inflamed gums
Bleeding gums
Receding gums
Gums oozing pus
Pale gums
Red gums
Purple gums
LIPS
1441
Pale lips
Red lips
Purple lips
Bluish-greenish lips
Yellow lips
Dry or cracked lips
Trembling lips
Peeled lips
Swollen lips
Inverted lips
Drooping lips
Abnormal lip colour in pregnancy
PALATE
Pale palate
Dull-pale palate
Yellow palate
Red palate
Purple palate
PHILTRUM
Flat philtrum
Stiff-looking philtrum
Pale philtrum
Red philtrum
Bluish-greenish philtrum
Dark philtrum
1442
MOUTH
Mouth Ulcers
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Stomach-Heat
Ulcers with a red rim on the gums or inside cheeks, bleeding
gums, thirst, foul breath, burning epigastric pain, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Tongue ulcers, thirst, bitter taste, palpitations, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Ulcers with a pale rim aggravated by overwork and lack of sleep,
dry throat at night, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating,
five-palm heat, malar flush, Red tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Yin Fire
Pale ulcers on the gums or inside cheeks, slightly red face or pale
face with a floating red colour on the cheeks, an intermittent and
recurrent feeling of heat in the face but cold limbs, intermittent
sore throat, dry mouth, dry lips, exhaustion, poor appetite, poor
digestion, weak limbs, Pale tongue, Weak or Overflowing-Empty
pulse.
These ulcers are due to Yin Fire as described by Li Dong Yuan in
his ‘Discussion on Stomach and Spleen’ (see 
Chapter 55
 
).
Liver-Fire 
Ulcers inside the cheeks, very painful and red in colour, thirst,
1443
bitter taste, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat
Ulcers inside the cheeks, red and festering, oozing sticky yellow
pus, fever, thirst, Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky
yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Phlegm
Ulcers inside the cheeks, red and swollen, oozing thin yellow pus,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the
chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold with Kidney deficiency
Ulcers inside the cheeks, white rim around them, swollen, aversion
to cold, fever, cough, itchy throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or
runny nose with clear watery discharge, sneezing, occipital
headache, body aches, thin white tongue coating, lower backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, Pale tongue, Floating-Tight pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: for mouth ulcers on gums and inside
cheeks in women treat the Directing Vessel irrespective
of the pattern causing them.
• 
 
If they are on the tongue, treat the Heart channel and
especially HE-5 Tongli.
Cold Sores
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
1444
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Cold sores at the corner of the mouth or on the edge of the upper
lip, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny
nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Stomach Damp-Heat
Cold sores at the corner of the mouth or on the edge of the lower
lip, a sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, facial pain, stuffed
nose or thick sticky nasal discharge, a feeling of fullness and pain
of the epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness, nausea, a feeling of heat,
dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Cold sores at the corner of the mouth or on the edge of the lower
lip, foul breath, thirst, burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Cold sores at the corner of the mouth or on the edge of the lower
lip, dry mouth in the evening, dull or burning epigastric pain, a
feeling of heat in the afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in
small sips, dry stools, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, night
sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red
centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Large Intestine
Cold sores on the upper lip, constipation with dry stools, a
burning sensation in the mouth, dry tongue, burning and swelling
in the anus, scanty dark urine, thick yellow (or brown or black) dry
tongue coating, Full-Rapid pulse (often Wiry on both Rear
positions).
1445
Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine
Cold sores on the upper lip, abdominal pain that is not relieved by
a bowel movement, diarrhoea, mucus and blood in stools,
offensive odour of stools, burning in the anus, scanty dark urine,
fever, sweating which does not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat,
thirst without a desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the body
and limbs, a feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium,
Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse or
pulse that is Slippery and Wiry on both the Rear positions.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I use LI-4 Hegu contralaterally for the corners of the
mouth, that is, on the left for cold sore on the right and
vice versa.
Cracked Corners Of The Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach-Heat
Cracked corners of the mouth, thirst, burning epigastric pain, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Cracked corners of the mouth, dry mouth with desire to sip water,
no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat, constipation (dry
stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain, dry mouth and
throat especially in the afternoon, a slight feeling of fullness after
eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, or without
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Cracked corners of the mouth, dry mouth and throat especially in
the afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, bleeding
gums, dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the
1446
afternoon, dry stools, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, night
sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red
centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Itching Around The Mouth
Stomach-Heat
Intense itching around mouth and especially at the corners and
below the mouth, cold sores, foul breath, burning epigastric pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind 
Slight itching around the mouth, dryness around the mouth,
greenish colour around the mouth, trembling mouth, facial tic,
slight flapping of the eyelid, blurred vision, floaters, unilateral
numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or
Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Itching around mouth, wet rash around mouth, cold sores, sticky
taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of fullness and pain
of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Disharmony of Penetrating and Directing Vessels 
Itching around mouth at period time or during the menopausal
time, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, irregular periods.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
deficiency of Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
The area around the mouth is controlled by the Liver
1447
channel and the Penetrating and Directing Vessels.
Dribbling From The Corners Of The Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth, poor appetite, tiredness,
slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency with Empty-Cold
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth, chronic runny nose with
watery white discharge, sneezing, slight shortness of breath, slight
cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch cold,
tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale tongue,
Weak pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Heat
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth, painful tongue, mouth
ulcers, dry mouth and lips, burning epigastric/abdominal pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, excessive hunger, red tip of the nose, dry stools,
scanty dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
This dribbling is due to Stomach-Heat flaring upwards causing
the fluids in the mouth to evaporate.
Wind-Phlegm 
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth, severe dizziness, blurred
vision, tremors, numbness or tingling of the limbs, tinnitus,
nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
1448
Invasion of external Wind
Dribbling from the corners of the mouth, numbness of the face,
deviation of eye and mouth, inability to shut eyelid completely,
watery eyes.
This is not an invasion of external Wind in the Lung’s Defensive-
Qi system (as when one catches a cold) but an invasion of external
Wind attacking the channels of the face causing facial paralysis
(Bell’s palsy).
Trembling Mouth
Liver-Blood and Liver-Yin deficiency with internal Wind
Slightly trembling mouth, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, blurred vision, floaters in the eyes, dry eyes, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion but with red cheek bones,
withered and brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night sweating.
The tongue and pulse presentation depends on whether Blood
or Yin deficiency predominates.
Qi stagnation and Phlegm
Trembling mouth, dribbling from the corners of the mouth,
epigastric or abdominal distension, a feeling of muzziness of the
head, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
irritability, a feeling of a lump in the throat, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Trembling mouth, thirst, foul breath, burning epigastric pain, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Trembling mouth, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry
pulse.
1449
Mouth Open
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Lung-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
Mouth open, chronic cough which is worse on exertion, scanty
phlegm that is difficult to expectorate or dilute watery phlegm,
spontaneous sweating, a feeling of cold, shortness of breath, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, weak voice, tongue Pale and
slightly Swollen in the front, pulse Empty on the right Front
position and slightly Slippery.
Heart-Fire
Mouth open, tongue ulcers, red face, palpitations, thirst, mental
restlessness, feeling agitated, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a
feeling of heat, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency
Mouth open, palpitations, mental dullness, palpitations, shortness
of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight depression,
spontaneous sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Deviation Of The Mouth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Liver-Wind 
Deviation of mouth, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind and Phlegm 
Deviation of mouth, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
1450
Invasion of Wind-Cold in the channels of the face
Sudden deviation of mouth, numbness of the face.
This is due to an invasion of Wind-Cold, not in the Lungs
Defensive-Qi portion (as in the common cold and influenza) but in
the channels of the face.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Intermittent deviation of mouth depending on emotional moods,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Slight deviation of mouth, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Toxic Heat in the channels of the face
Deviation of mouth, thirst, bitter taste, swelling and pain of the
face, toothache, headache, red eyes, swollen face, Red tongue with
red points with thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
TONGUE
The tongue signs discussed in this chapter deal only with a few
unusual tongue signs; tongue diagnosis itself is discussed in full in
Chapters 23
 
–
27
 
.
Itchy Tongue
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Heart-Fire
Itchy tip or front of the tongue, burning sensation of the tongue,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
1451
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight itching of the tongue especially in the evening, dry mouth
and throat, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, thirst with a
desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush,
night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue redder on the tip with
no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Itchy tongue, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
anxiety, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
lower backache, night sweating, scanty dark urine, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Itchy tongue with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Painful Tongue
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Heart-Fire
Painful tongue especially on the tip, tongue ulcers, palpitations,
thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of
agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red
face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
1452
Slight pain of the tongue especially in the evening, dry mouth and
throat, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed 
sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth
and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in the
evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue
redder on the tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Painful tongue, bleeding gums, foul breath, intense thirst with a
desire to drink cold liquids, burning epigastric pain, mental
restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, dry stools, sour
regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a feeling of heat,
sour regurgitation, Red tongue with a thick, dry dark-yellow
coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slightly painful tongue, dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling
of heat in the afternoon, dry mouth and throat especially in the
afternoon, thirst with desire to drink in small sips, dry stools, a
slight feeling of fullness after eating, night sweating, five-palm
heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Painful tongue, thirst, bitter taste, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Painful tongue, thirst, bitter taste, sputum in throat, palpitations,
mental restlessness, red face, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
expectoration of phlegm, sputum in the throat, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, agitation, mental confusion, incoherent speech,
rash behaviour, uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting,
depression, manic behaviour, Red tongue with redder swollen tip
1453
and Heart crack with a sticky, dry yellow coating inside it, Slippery-
Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Numbness Of The Tongue
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Numbness of the tongue, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the Heart
Numbness of the tongue, swollen tongue, dizziness, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, numbness/tingling
of the limbs, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Numbness of the tongue, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, tics, convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of limbs,
stiff neck, opisthotonos, in severe cases coma, Stiff, Moving or
Deviated tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver Wind-Phlegm 
Numbness of the tongue, deviated tongue, severe dizziness,
blurred vision, tremors, numbness or tingling of the limbs,
tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Numbness of the tongue, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Chronic Blood stasis
1454
Numbness of the tongue, dark complexion, headache, chest pain,
mental restlessness, abdominal pain, dark nails, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Tongue Ulcers
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Heart-Fire
Painful tongue ulcers with raised, red rim, bitter taste, thirst,
palpitations, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a
feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
heat, red face, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Tongue ulcers with white rims, dry mouth and throat, palpitations,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency
to be easily startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot
and bothered’, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in
the 
evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red
tongue redder on the tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Full-Heat in the Small Intestine
Tongue ulcers with red rims, dry stools, dark urine, painful
urination, blood in the urine, abdominal pain, dry yellow tongue
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I use HE-5 Tongli as a point to reach the tongue (in
addition to other points for the relevant pattern).
TEETH
Toothache
1455
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 35
Toothache obviously excludes causes such as abscesses or root
canal problems.
Stomach-Fire
Toothache especially on the lower teeth, mouth ulcers, foul breath,
intense thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids, bleeding gums,
burning epigastric pain, mental restlessness, dry mouth, dry
stools, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a
feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, Red tongue with a thick, dry,
dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Toothache, swollen gums, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to
drink, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium, a feeling of
heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or thick sticky nasal discharge,
nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Toothache, mouth ulcers, dry mouth or thirst with a desire to drink
in small sips, dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in
the afternoon, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
dry stools, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, night sweating,
five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red centre only)
without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dull toothache that comes and goes, weak gums, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Heat in Large Intestine
Severe toothache, especially of the upper teeth, mouth ulcers,
bleeding gums, constipation with dry stools, burning sensation in
1456
the mouth, dry tongue, burning and swelling in the anus, scanty
dark urine, thick yellow (or brown or black) dry tongue coating,
Full-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in Large Intestine
Toothache, especially of upper teeth, thirst with no desire to drink,
mouth ulcers, a sticky taste, abdominal pain that is not relieved by
a bowel movement, diarrhoea, mucus and blood in stools,
offensive odour of stools, burning in the anus, scanty dark urine,
fever, sweating which does not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat,
a feeling of heaviness of the body and limbs, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Spleen and Heart
Toothache, bleeding gums, red lips, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste,
burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the
nose, dry lips, dry stools, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of external Wind
Toothache, aversion to cold, fever, stiff neck, occipital headache,
sneezing.
Other symptoms and signs, including tongue and pulse, depend
on whether the pattern is Wind-Cold or Wind-Heat.
‘Wind-Cold in the Brain’
Severe toothache extending to the brain after an invasion of
external Wind that has not been cleared, Purple tongue.
Tooth Cavities
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Tooth cavities, especially of lower teeth, bleeding gums, red lips,
1457
thirst with no desire to drink, sticky taste, a feeling of fullness and
pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness, nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Tooth cavities, loose teeth, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, uncomfortable feeling in the
epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine
Tooth cavities, especially of upper teeth, thirst with no desire to
drink, mouth ulcers, abdominal pain that is not relieved by a
bowel movement, diarrhoea, mucus and blood in stools, offensive
odour of stools, burning in the anus, scanty dark urine, fever,
sweating which does not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat,
feeling of heaviness of the body and limbs, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Tooth cavities, loose teeth, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus,
weak knees.
Other symptoms and signs, including pulse and tongue, depend
on whether there is a Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Loose Teeth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach-Heat
Loose teeth, toothache, mouth ulcers, thirst, foul breath, burning
epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
1458
Kidney deficiency
Loose teeth, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, tiredness, pulse
Weak on both Rear positions.
Other symptoms and signs depends on whether there is a
Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Loose teeth, toothache, red cheeks, poor appetite, poor digestion,
retching, gnawing hunger, loss of sense of taste, slight epigastric
pain, dry mouth and lips, dry stools, thin body, sallow complexion
with red tip of the nose, night sweating, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating and transversal cracks on the
sides, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Loose teeth, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory, hardness of
hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a
feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, lower backache, ache in
bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, scanty dark
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Grinding Teeth
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Grinding teeth when tense, irritability, abdominal distension and
pain, alternation of constipation and diarrhoea, stools sometimes
dry and bitty (small pieces) and sometimes loose, flatulence,
tiredness, tongue normal coloured or slightly Red on the sides,
pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Stomach and Heart-Fire
Grinding teeth, bleeding gums, burning epigastric pain, intense
thirst with desire to drink cold liquids, mental restlessness, dry
mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry stools, sour
1459
regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a
feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, red face, bitter taste, tongue Red with a thick, dry,
dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food 
Grinding of teeth in children, fullness, pain and distension of the
epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting of
sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, insomnia,
loose stools or 
constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating,
Full-Slippery pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Weakly grinding teeth, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Internal Empty-Wind
Grinding teeth, dizziness, headache, tics, fine tremors, tiredness,
blurred vision, poor memory, Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
The tongue may be Pale or Red without coating depending on
whether there is an underlying Blood or Yin deficiency.
Invasion of External Wind
Grinding teeth, shivering, aversion to cold, fever, stiff neck,
occipital headache, body aches, Floating pulse.
Plaque
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach-Heat
Plaque, teeth yellow at the junction with the gums, thirst, foul
breath, burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea,
excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1460
Heat in the Stomach and Kidneys
Plaque, teeth yellow at the junction with the gums, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, dark urine, painful urination,
backache, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Plaque, teeth dull yellow at the junction with the gums, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating,
vertigo, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache, ache in the
bones, nocturnal emissions, constipation, dark scanty urine,
infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression,
slight anxiety, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Dry And White Teeth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Acute interior Heat following an invasion of Wind-Heat
White, dry teeth, a feeling of heat, fever, thirst, sweating, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
White, dry teeth, thirst, foul breath, burning epigastric pain, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Dry And Dull Teeth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry, dull teeth which look like dry bones, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry
mouth and throat at night, lower backache, ache in the bones,
1461
nocturnal emissions, constipation, dark scanty urine, infertility,
premature ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight
anxiety, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Very dry, dull teeth which look like dry bones, dizziness, tinnitus,
vertigo, poor memory, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry
mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening,
malar flush, menopausal hot flushes, thirst with desire to sip
fluids, lower backache, ache in the bones, nocturnal emissions
with dreams, constipation, dark scanty urine, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, depression, anxiety, insomnia, excessive
menstrual bleeding, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dry, dull teeth, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Yellow And Dry Teeth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen with
predominance of Heat
Yellow and dry teeth, dull-yellow complexion, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness, thirst without desire to drink, nausea, loose
stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dull-yellow and dry teeth, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry mouth and throat at
1462
night, lower backache, ache in the bones, nocturnal emissions,
constipation, dark scanty urine, infertility, premature ejaculation,
tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight anxiety, normal-coloured
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Accumulation of Cold in the abdomen with false Yang
above
Yellow and dry teeth, abdominal pain, a feeling of cold, cold feet,
Pale tongue, Tight-Slow pulse.
Grey Teeth
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Grey and dry teeth, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory,
hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, lower backache, ache in
the bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, dark
scanty urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness,
depression, anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Upper Teeth Moist And Lower Teeth Dry
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Kidney and Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat
(Kidneys and Heart not harmonized) 
Upper teeth moist and lower teeth dry, dry mouth with a desire to
sip water, palpitations, mental restlessness, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, anxiety, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal emissions with
dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-palm
heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue with redder tip and
a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse or a pulse that is
1463
Deep and Weak on both Rear positions and Overflowing on both
Front positions.
GUMS
Inflamed Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Stomach-Heat
Inflamed gums, foul breath, mouth ulcers especially on the lower
gum, thirst, burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea,
excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Inflamed gums, especially lower gum, bleeding gums, mouth
ulcers with a white rim, dry mouth and throat especially in the
afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dull or
burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry
stools, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without coating in the
centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Inflamed gums, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed
or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the
sides in the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Purple Leg and Teeth Nutritional Impairment Pattern 
Swollen, inflamed and bleeding gums, cracked lips, painful legs,
swelling of the legs in patches like clouds and discoloured like
unripe aubergine seeds, hardness of the flesh, difficulty in
walking.
There are actually two manifestations of this pattern, one with
Damp-Cold and the other with Toxic Heat. If there is Damp-Cold
1464
there will also be a feeling of heaviness, cold limbs, oedema and
ache in the joints. If there is Toxic Heat, there will be a bitter taste,
dry mouth, thirst, foul breath, Red tongue with red points and
thick, sticky, dry yellow coating and an Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
‘Walking Crow’ Teeth Nutritional Impairment Pattern 
In the beginning hard, red nodules on the gum, after 1 or 2 days
the gums become inflamed and then greyish-black, bleeding gums
that are neither painful nor itchy, foul breath, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating.
This pattern is more common in children.
Bleeding Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
: 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Deficient Spleen-Qi not holding Blood
Bleeding gums, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Bleeding and painful gums, foul breath, intense thirst with a
desire to drink cold liquids, burning epigastric pain, mental
restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry stools,
sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a feeling of
heat, sour regurgitation, Red tongue with a thick, dry, dark-yellow
coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty Heat
Bleeding gums, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dull or burning
epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, constipation (dry
stools), a feeling of hunger but no desire to eat, a slight feeling of
fullness after eating, night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding
1465
gums, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without coating in the
centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Bleeding gums, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory,
deafness, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a
feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, lower backache, ache in
bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, scanty dark
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Receding Gums
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 8
 
: 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 35
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Receding gums, pale lips, pale gums, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Receding gums, red gums, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, foul
breath, burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to
drink cold liquids, mental restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools,
dry mouth, mouth ulcers, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, sour
regurgitation, a feeling of heat, tongue Red with a thick, dry, dark-
yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Receding gums, bleeding gums, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor
memory, deafness, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes, thirst with desire to sip fluids, lower backache, ache in
bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, scanty dark
1466
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember that, apart from the Stomach, the Kidneys
also influence the gums. ‘Loose teeth’ is a sign
associated with a Kidney deficiency in Chinese
medicine, but teeth also become loose from gum
disease.
Gums Oozing Pus
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach-Fire
Gums oozing pus, tooth abscess, red and swollen gums, bleeding
gums, toothache, foul breath, burning epigastric pain, intense
thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids, mental restlessness, dry
stools, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, nausea, vomiting soon after
eating, sour regurgitation, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
thick, dry, dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat 
Gums oozing pus, swollen glands, bleeding gums, aversion to
cold, sore throat, fever, tonsillitis, tonsils oozing pus, headache,
tongue red on the sides with red points and a yellow coating,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood with Toxic Heat
Chronic, recurrent bouts of gums oozing pus, ulcers on the gums
which are slow to heal, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
1467
Pale Gums
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Pale gums, pale lips, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Blood deficiency 
Dull-pale gums, tiredness, dizziness, blurred vision, scanty
periods, Pale tongue, Choppy or Weak pulse.
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Bright-pale gums, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, a feeling
of cold, cold limbs, oedema. Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Red Gums
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach-Heat
Bright-red gums, swollen gums, bleeding gums, thirst, foul breath,
burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive
hunger, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Red gums, bleeding gums, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire
to drink in small sips, dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of
heat in the afternoon, constipation (dry stools), feeling of hunger
but no desire to eat, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, night
sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without
1468
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Red gums, dry and red lips, burning epigastric/abdominal pain,
excessive hunger, red tip of the nose, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry
stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, yellow complexion, Red
tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen Empty-Heat
Pale-red gums, poor appetite, poor digestion, retching, gnawing
hunger, loss of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth and lips, dry
stools, thin body, sallow complexion with red tip of the nose, night
sweating, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, Red tongue
without coating and transversal cracks on the sides, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Purple Gums
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Purple gums, bleeding gums, toothache, purple lips, severe,
stabbing epigastric pain that may be worse at night, dislike of
pressure, nausea, vomiting, possibly vomiting of blood, vomiting
of food looking like coffee grounds, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Heat at the Blood level in febrile diseases
Purple gums, bleeding gums, dark macular rash, mental
confusion, fever at night, high fever, irritability, vomiting of blood,
epistaxis, blood in stools, blood in urine, Dark-Red tongue without
coating, Fine-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
LIPS
Pale Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
1469
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Spleen 
Pale lips, dull-pale complexion, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, thin body, scanty periods or amenorrhoea, insomnia,
joint ache, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Pale lips, dull-pale complexion, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Pale and slightly bluish lips or bright-white lips, pale complexion,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, abdominal
pain, tiredness, lassitude, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow
pulse.
Red Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Full-Heat
Red and swollen lips, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Heart, Lungs, Stomach, Liver, Kidneys and Spleen
may all cause red lips and other symptoms and signs depend on
the organ involved.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Red, cracked and dry lips, dry mouth, thirst with a desire to drink
in small sips, feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Empty-Heat in the Heart, Lungs, Stomach, Liver, Kidneys and
Spleen may all cause red lips and other symptoms and signs
depend on the organ involved.
1470
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red lips (especially in children), aversion to cold, fever, sore throat,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red sides or
front or both, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Acute Heat at the Qi level in febrile diseases (Heat)
Red and swollen lips, fever, a feeling of heat, throwing off of the
bedclothes, thirst, profuse sweating, Red tongue with yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Acute Heat at the Qi level in febrile diseases (Fire)
Red, swollen, dry and cracked lips, fever, a feeling of heat, thirst,
dry mouth, dry stools, dark urine, mental restlessness, Red tongue
with dry, dark-yellow or brown coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Purple Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Blood stasis
Purple lips, dark complexion, headache, chest, hypochondrial or
abdominal pain, palpitations, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Liver or the Heart.
Severe Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Purple lips, pale complexion, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, abdominal pain, tiredness, lassitude,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs.
Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Severe Kidney-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Purple lips, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
This is a severe deficiency of Kidney-Yang with internal Empty-
1471
Cold that leads to some Blood stasis; for this reason the
complexion is dark rather than pale, as it should be in Yang
deficiency.
Internal Full-Cold
Bluish-purple lips, bright-white complexion, a feeling of cold, cold
limbs, abdominal pain, bright-pale complexion, thick white tongue
coating, Deep-Full-Tight-Slow pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Turbid Phlegm in the Lungs
Bluish-purple lips, sticky taste, breathlessness, expectoration of
phlegm, wheezing, inability to lie down, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, sticky, dirty tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Heat at the Nutritive-Qi or Blood level in acute febrile
diseases
Reddish-purple lips, fever at night, mental restlessness and
confusion, macular rash, bleeding, Red tongue without coating,
Fine-Rapid pulse.
Bluish-Greenish Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Internal Cold
Bluish lips, bluish-white complexion, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
abdominal pain.
Other symptoms, including tongue and pulse, depend on
whether it is Full or Empty-Cold and also on the organ involved.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Greenish lips, greenish complexion, abdominal distension and
pain, irritability, chest pain, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Qi and Blood stagnation of the Heart, Lungs, Stomach or Liver
may cause greenish lips and other symptoms and signs depend on
the organ involved.
1472
Yellow Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Bright-yellow lips, sticky taste, dull-yellow complexion, a feeling of
fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor
appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without desire to drink,
nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
Dull-yellow lips, dull-yellowish complexion, sticky taste,
abdominal pain, a feeling of cold in the abdomen, cold limbs, a
feeling of fullness and heaviness, Pale tongue with sticky white
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Full-Heat with Blood stasis
Dark-yellow lips, a feeling of heat, thirst, abdominal pain,
headache, chest pain, Reddish-Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy and
Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Dry Or Cracked Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach and Spleen-Yin deficiency
Dry lips, dry mouth, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to
eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric
pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but
with no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, a slight
feeling of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Full-Heat
1473
Cracked, red and swollen lips, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat of the Lungs, Stomach, Spleen and Large Intestine may
cause cracked lips and other symptoms and signs depend on
which organ is involved.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Cracked and dry lips, dry mouth, night sweating, five-palm heat,
thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Empty-Heat of the Lungs, Stomach, Spleen and Large Intestine
may cause cracked lips and other symptoms and signs depend on
which organ is involved.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Slightly cracked and dry lips, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood stasis
Cracked, dry and purple lips, dry mouth with desire to drink
without swallowing, headache, chest pain, abdominal pain, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Blood stasis of the Heart, Lungs, Stomach or Liver may cause
cracked lips and other symptoms and signs depend on the organ
involved. As there is an interchange between Blood and Body
Fluids, severe, long-standing Blood stasis impairs the metabolism
of Body Fluids and causes Dryness.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In women, dry lips is often a sign ‘clinching’ the
diagnosis of Spleen-Yin deficiency.
Trembling Lips
1474
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slow, trembling lips, pale lips, pale complexion, poor appetite,
tiredness, slight abdominal distension, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind 
Trembling and dry lips, itching around the mouth, dry skin, slight
tremor of the head or hand or both, facial tic, dizziness, blurred
vision, unilateral numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin
tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Fast, trembling lips, red lips, bleeding gums, intense thirst with a
desire to drink cold liquids, foul breath, dry mouth, mouth ulcers,
burning epigastric pain, mental restlessness, bleeding gums, dry
stools, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, a
feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red with a thick, dry
dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Peeled Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen-Heat
Peeled, fresh red, cracked and swollen lips, dry lips, mouth ulcers,
thirst, burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red
tip of the nose, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine,
yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Peeled, dry, cracked lips, poor appetite, poor digestion, retching,
gnawing hunger, loss of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry stools,
thin body, sallow complexion with red tip of the nose, night
sweating, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, Red tongue
1475
without coating and transversal cracks on the sides, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Swollen Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Toxic Heat affecting Stomach and Spleen
Swollen, dark lips, thirst, feeling of heat, mental restlessness,
pustular rashes, swelling, pain, headache, Red tongue with red
points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Swollen and bright red lips, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Wind-Heat in the skin
Swollen and bright-red lips with acute onset, urticarial rash,
swelling of the throat, itching, red eyes.
This corresponds to an allergic reaction to foods or a bee sting.
Inverted Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Severe Yang deficiency
Inverted lips, cold limbs, sweating, feeling cold, lassitude,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, loose stools, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak or Scattered pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Severe Yin deficiency
1476
Inverted lips, a feeling of heat, dry skin, dry mouth, dry nails,
dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, tongue without coating, Fine or
Minute pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Drooping Lips
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Drooping lips, a feeling of bearing down in the abdomen,
prolapse, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Drooping lips, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Abnormal Lip Colour In Pregnancy
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Blood deficiency 
Pale lips in pregnancy, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, palpitations,
Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Severe Blood deficiency 
White-coloured lips, dryness of the corners of the mouth,
exhaustion, palpitations, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, dry skin,
tongue Pale and dry or Pale and without coating, Choppy or Fine
1477
pulse.
Blood stasis from Cold 
Bluish lips in pregnancy, abdominal pain that is alleviated by the
application of heat, chest pain, headache, cold limbs, Bluish-purple
tongue, Tight pulse.
PALATE
Pale Palate
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Pale palate that looks like the skin of milk, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Yang deficiency
Pale palate that looks almost white, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, uncomfortable feeling of the
epigastrium, lack of taste sensation, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
Pale and wet tongue, Weak-Deep pulse.
Dull-Pale Palate
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Spleen and Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dull-pale palate, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, dull-pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, thin body, scanty periods or amenorrhoea, insomnia,
dizziness, numbness of limbs, blurred vision, ‘floaters’ in eyes,
pale lips, cramps, withered and brittle nails, dry hair and skin, Pale
1478
and dry tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Dull-pale palate, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tiredness,
blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Yellow Palate
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Chronic Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dull-yellow palate, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, uncomfortable feeling of the epigastrium, lack of
sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
Bright-yellow palate, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Red Palate
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Full-Heat
Red palate, thirst, mouth ulcers, a feeling of heat, mental
restlessness, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Purple Palate
1479
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Blood stasis
Purple palate, abdominal pain, chest pain, headache, mental
restlessness, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved
(usually the Liver, Lungs, Stomach or Heart).
PHILTRUM
Flat Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Kidney deficiency
Flat philtrum, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, tiredness.
Other symptoms and signs, including pulse and tongue, depend
on whether there is a Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Flat philtrum, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and
lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst
without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools with offensive
odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
According to the ancient Chinese art of face reading,
a flat philtrum in women may indicate infertility.
Stiff-Looking Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Blood stasis
Stiff-looking philtrum, dark lips, abdominal pain, chest pain,
1480
headache, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Pale Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Qi deficiency
Pale philtrum, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Full-Cold
Bright-pale philtrum, greyish-pale complexion, abdominal pain,
epigastric pain, cold limbs, pain alleviated by exposure to heat and
by drinking warm drinks and aggravated by exposure to cold and
by drinking cold drinks, thick white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Empty-Cold
Pale philtrum, greyish-pale complexion, dull abdominal pain, dull
epigastric pain, cold limbs, pain alleviated by exposure to heat and
by drinking warm drinks, and aggravated by exposure to cold and
by drinking cold drinks, a feeling of cold, tiredness, Pale tongue
with thin white tongue coating, Deep-Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Red Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Heat in the Blood
Red philtrum, skin rashes, a feeling of heat, thirst, bleeding,
mental restlessness, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red philtrum, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, headache, body
aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red sides/front, Floating-Rapid
1481
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Red philtrum with skin spots oozing fluid, abdominal pain that is
not relieved by a bowel movement, diarrhoea, mucus and blood in
stools, offensive odour of stools, burning in the anus, scanty dark
urine, fever, sweating which does not decrease the fever, a feeling
of heat, thirst without a desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of
the body and limbs, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Bluish-Greenish Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Internal Cold
Bluish philtrum, a feeling of cold, abdominal pain, cold limbs, Pale
tongue, Deep pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Full or
Empty-Cold.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Greenish philtrum, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Dark Philtrum
Observation,
 
Chapter 8
Heat in the Blood
Dark philtrum, skin rashes, a feeling of heat, thirst, bleeding,
mental restlessness, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Dark philtrum, yellow, itchy vaginal discharge, lower abdominal
pain, dark/cloudy urine, tongue with sticky yellow coating on the
1482
root, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1483
CHAPTER 61
 
EYES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
VISION
Blurred vision and floaters
Strabismus
Myopia
Hyperopia
Decreased night vision
Decreased visual acuity
Sudden blindness
ITCHY EYES
DRY EYES
HOT AND PAINFUL EYES
STREAMING EYES
DISCHARGE FROM THE EYES
EYE COLOUR
Yellow (sclera)
Red (sclera)
Bluish-greenish (sclera)
1484
Dark (sclera)
Pale corners
Red corners
EYELIDS
Stye
Red eyelids
Dark eyelids
Green eyelids
Pale eyelids
Swollen eyelids
Boil on the eyelid
Pain of the eyelids
Flapping eyelids
Drooping eyelids
Loss of control of the eyelids
Nodules within the eyelids
Small red grains inside the eyelids
Redness inside the lower lids
GLAUCOMA
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE EYES
EYEBALL
Protruding eyeball
Sunken eyeball
Scaly eyeballs
Quivering eyeball
Eyeball turning up
1485
ECCHYMOSIS UNDER CONJUNCTIVA
RED VEINS/MEMBRANE
Red veins in the eyes
Drooping red membrane
Red membrane in the corner of the eye
CORNEA
Corneal opacity
Scarring after corneal opacity
WHITE SPECKS
PUPILS
Red ring around the pupil
White membrane on the pupil in children
Yellow fluid between pupil and iris
Bleeding between pupil and iris
Dilated pupils
Contracted pupils
STARING, FIXED EYES
CLOSED EYES
OPEN EYES
INVERTED EYELASHES
CATARACT
VISION
Blurred Vision And Floaters
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
There are three Chinese terms which may be translated as
‘blurred vision’. The first is 
mu xuan (mu
 
meaning ‘eye’), in which
the term 
xuan
 
suggests also dizziness; the second is 
mu hun,
 
in
1486
which the term 
hun
 
suggests ‘faint feeling’; the third is 
mu hua,
 
in
which the term 
hua
 
means ‘flower’ and the two terms together
indicate that the patient sees objects that look like flowers or
butterfly wings (i.e. floaters). This third term could therefore be
translated more specifically as ‘seeing floaters’. Therefore, the
Chinese term for blurred vision also implies the symptom of
dizziness and there is a certain overlap between these two terms
and symptoms. In fact, the term for ‘dizziness’ is 
xuan yun, xuan
being the same character as in 
mu xuan
 
meaning blurred vision.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Blurred vision or floaters or both, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Blurred vision or floaters or both, dry eyes, diminished night
vision, dizziness, dry hair, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
insomnia, scanty menstruation or amenor-rhoea, dull-pale
complexion without lustre but with red cheekbones, cramps,
withered and brittle nails, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Blurred vision or floaters or both, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry
mouth and throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty
dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Turbid Phlegm in the head
Blurred vision or floaters or both, dull headache with a feeling of
heaviness and muzziness of the head, poor memory and
concentration, dizziness, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, nausea, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse.
1487
Liver-Yang rising
Blurred vision or floaters or both, often occurring during a
headache attack, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Blurred vision or floaters or both, palpitations, dizziness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency
to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Blurred vision, bloodshot eyes, painful eyes, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Blurred vision, dizziness, tinnitus, bitter taste, dry throat,
irritability, red face and ears, hypochondrial fullness, unilateral or
bilateral yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of Minister Fire (Kidney-Yang deficiency)
Blurred vision or floaters or both, watery eyes, lower backache,
cold knees, sensation of cold in the lower back, a feeling of cold,
weak legs, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at
night, infertility in women, impotence, premature ejaculation,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Blurred vision or floaters or both, tired eyes, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, slight depression,
tendency to obesity, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1488
Strabismus
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Kidney-Essence deficiency 
Strabismus from childhood, short-sightedness, weak constitution
as a child, poor bone development in children, softening of bones
in adults, deafness, weakness 
of the knees and legs, poor memory,
loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the hair, lower
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
Liver-Wind 
Strabismus, headaches, vertigo, tremors, tinnitus, tics,
convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of the limbs, stiff neck,
opisthotonos, in severe cases coma, Stiff, Moving or Deviated
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Strabismus, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Severe, chronic deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Liver 
 
Strabismus, extreme exhaustion, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, dry skin and hair, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Internal Cold
Strabismus, greyish-pale complexion, abdominal pain, epigastric
pain, cold limbs, pain alleviated by exposure to heat and by
drinking warm drinks and aggravated by exposure to cold and by
drinking cold drinks, thick white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
1489
Liver-Blood stasis
Strabismus, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark
and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails
and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm
pulse.
Toxic Heat
Strabismus, fever, a feeling of agitation, mental restlessness, red
skin rashes, Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky, dry dark-
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm obstructing Lungs and Spleen
Strabismus, blurred vision, chronic cough coming in bouts with
profuse sticky white sputum which is easy to expectorate, pasty-
white complexion, a feeling of oppression in the chest and
epigastrium, shortness of breath, dislike of lying down, wheezing,
nausea, Swollen tongue with a sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Myopia
Liver-Blood deficiency 
 
Myopia, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Myopia from childhood, blurred vision, floaters, weak child,
nocturnal enuresis, pulse Weak on both Rear positions.
This is a congenital Kidney and Liver deficiency in children
causing myopia; due to their young age, there are not many
symptoms. The myopia itself, the weakness of the child, possibly
nocturnal enuresis and a Weak pulse on the Kidney positions are
enough to diagnose this pattern.
Hyperopia
‘Hyperopia’ is the opposite of myopia; that is, the vision is better
1490
for far objects than for near.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Hyperopia, poor bone development in children, softening of the
bones in adults, deafness, weakness of the knees and legs, poor
memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the hair,
weakness from sexual activity, lower backache, infertility, sterility,
dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-Empty or
Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs against a
background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and Deep-
Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Hyperopia, red and dry eyes, blurred vision, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, scanty dark urine,
insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Hyperopia, blurred vision, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, dizziness, numbness/tingling of 
limbs, palpitations,
dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Decreased Night Vision
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Decreased night vision, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Decreased night vision, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull
occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of
limbs, dry throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating,
1491
dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Decreased night vision, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Decreased night vision, lower backache, cold knees, a sensation of
cold in the back, a feeling of cold, weak legs, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, impotence, tiredness, abundant clear or
scanty clear urination, urination at night, loose stools, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down, early-
morning diarrhoea, chronic diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Decreased night vision, blurred vision, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Decreased Visual Acuity
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Decreased visual acuity, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Decreased visual acuity, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion but with red cheekbones, withered and
brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night sweating, normal-coloured
tongue without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
1492
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Decreased visual acuity, dry eyes, floaters, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine,
tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Turbid Phlegm obstructing the head’s orifices
Decreased visual acuity, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, dull
headache with a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head,
poor memory and concentration, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, nausea, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Decreased visual acuity, blurred vision, palpitations, dizziness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency
to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Sudden Blindness
Liver-Fire
Sudden unilateral blindness, bloodshot eyes, headaches, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Sudden unilateral blindness, pain in the eyes,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple
or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Liver
Sudden blindness, red face and eyes, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, tinnitus/deafness (with sudden onset),
1493
temporal headache, dizziness, thirst, bitter taste, dream-disturbed
sleep, constipation with dry stools, dark-yellow urine, epistaxis,
hae-matemesis, haemoptysis, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
rattling sound in the throat, a feeling of muzzi-ness of the head,
expectoration of sputum, hypertension, Red and Swollen tongue
with redder sides and with sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Heart
Sudden blindness, red face, red eyes, palpitations, mental
restlessness, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat,
bitter taste, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
agitation, mental confusion, incoherent speech, rash behaviour,
tendency to hit or scold people, uncontrolled laughter or crying,
shouting, muttering to oneself, depression, manic behaviour, Red
tongue with redder-swollen tip and Heart crack with a sticky
yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Sudden unilateral blindness, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Heat at the Blood level (within the Four Levels)
Sudden blindness, high fever at night, macular skin eruptions,
mental confusion, coma, bleeding, Dark-Red and dry tongue
without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
ITCHY EYES
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Slightly itchy eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, scanty
1494
menstruation, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Itchy eyes, floaters, dry eyes, blurred vision, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion but with red cheekbones, withered and brittle nails,
dry skin and hair, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Severely itchy eyes, bloodshot eyes, painful eyes, headache, red
face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Itchy eyes, red eyes, burning sensation in the eyes, redness in the
inner canthus of the eyes, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue
ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Wind
Itchy eyes, dry eyes, blurred vision, tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or
Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Itchy eyes, discharge from the eyes, yellow complexion and eyes,
blurred vision, a heavy feeling in the eyelids, dizziness,
hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness,
unilateral or bilateral thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
1495
Itchy eyes with sudden onset, unbearable itching, aversion to cold,
fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow
discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst,
swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
DRY EYES
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale 
complexion but with red
cheekbones, withered and brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or
Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine,
tiredness, lassitude, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Dry and red eyes with burning sensation, bloodshot eyes, painful
eyes, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Dry eyes, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth
and throat, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without
coating or with rootless coating, Floating-Empty pulse, especially
1496
on the left Front position.
Severe Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale and Thin
tongue with very Pale or orangey sides, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dry cough which is worse in the
evening, dry throat and mouth, thin body breathlessness on
exertion, lower backache, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, scanty urination, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
HOT AND PAINFUL EYES
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Liver-Fire
Hot and painful eyes, bloodshot eyes, headaches, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Hot and painful eyes, a feeling of distension of the eyes, headache,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
Wiry pulse.
Heart-Fire
Hot and painful eyes, red eyes, redness of the inner canthus of the
eyes, burning sensation in the eyes, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
1497
Liver-Wind 
Painful eyes (not necessarily hot), tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or
Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the head
Hot and painful eyes, sticky eyelids, heaviness of the eyelids, sticky
taste, facial pain, sticky yellow nasal discharge, a feeling of
heaviness of the head, thirst without desire to drink, a feeling of
heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Hot and painful eyes, sticky eyelids, blurred vision, a feeling of
heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling of heat, red face,
greasy skin, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in the
throat, expectoration of yellow sputum, dizziness, nausea, Red and
Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the head
Painful eyes (not necessarily hot), dark rings under the eyes,
headache, dark complexion, bulging eyes, mental agitation, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dull ache in the eyes (not necessarily hot), blurred vision, floaters,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Dull ache in the eyes (not necessarily hot), dull headache,
palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale
complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
1498
Dull ache in the eyes (not necessarily hot), dull occipital headache,
blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, tinnitus, lower backache, poor
memory.
Other manifestations, including tongue and pulse, depend on
whether there is Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Deficiency of Qi and Yin
Slightly hot and painful eyes, mild pain, a desire to shut the eyes,
dry eyes, slightly red eyes, dizziness, tiredness, dry throat, loose
stools, poor appetite, Pale tongue or normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Weak or Floating-Empty pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Hot and painful eyes with sudden onset, red eyes, aversion to cold,
fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow
discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst,
swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
STREAMING EYES
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 6
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 42
There are traditionally two types of streaming eyes: one is called
liu lei,
 
which indicates runny and streaming eyes and is described
here; the other is called 
yan chi,
 
which indicates a thick discharge
from the eye and is described under ‘Discharge from the eyes’.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Streaming eyes, floaters, blurred vision, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
This is called ‘cold streaming’.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Streaming eyes, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
1499
pulse.
This is called ‘cold streaming’.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Heat 
Streaming eyes, itchy eyes, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull pale
face with ‘floating’ red colour on the cheeks, thirst, irritability,
headache, tongue Pale but also slightly Red on the sides, pulse
Choppy or Fine and slightly Rapid.
Liver-Fire
Streaming eyes, bloodshot eyes, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Streaming eyes, itchy eyes, red and dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, malar flush, lower backache, dry
throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night sweating,
dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, five-palm heat, a
feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Streaming eyes, red, red inner canthus of the eyes, painful eyes,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Spleen and Lungs
Streaming eyes, swollen eyelids, sticky eyelids, chronic cough
coming in bouts with profuse sticky white sputum which is easy to
expectorate, pasty-white complexion, a feeling of oppression in the
chest, shortness of breath, a dislike of lying down, wheezing,
1500
nausea, abdominal fullness, tendency to obesity, Swollen tongue
with a sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Empty-Cold in the Liver channel
Streaming eyes, fullness and distension of the hypogas-trium with
pain which refers downwards to the 
scrotum and testis and
upwards to the hypochon-drium, alleviation of the pain by warmth,
straining of the testis or contraction of the scrotum, vertical
headache, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, vomiting of clear
watery fluid or dry vomiting, Pale and wet tongue with a white
coating, Deep-Wiry-Fine-Slow pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Streaming eyes with sudden onset, itchy eyes, pain in the eye,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
This is called ‘hot streaming’.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Streaming eyes with sudden onset, itchy eyes, aversion to cold,
fever, cough, itchy throat, slight breathless-ness, stuffed or runny
nose with clear watery discharge, sneezing, occipital headache,
body aches, thin white tongue coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
DISCHARGE FROM THE EYES
Observation
 
Chapter 6
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 42
‘Discharge from the eyes’ is a translation of the Chinese term
yan chi,
 
which indicates a thick discharge from the eyes as opposed
to a watery one, which is called 
liu lei.
Liver-Fire
Yellow discharge from the eyes, bloodshot eyes, painful eyes,
headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
1501
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Fire
Yellow discharge from the eyes, red, painful eyes, palpitations,
thirst, agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Yellow, thin discharge from the eyes, dry and red eyes, a feeling of
heat in the evening, dry mouth at night, night sweating, five-palm
heat, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Liver, Heart, Kidneys or Lungs.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Chronic light watery discharge from the eyes that is aggravated by
overexertion, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tiredness,
blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Yellow discharge from the eyes, itchy and red eyes, aversion to
cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow
discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst,
swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat (measles)
Thick, yellow discharge from the eyes, fever, thirst, restlessness,
red eyes, Red tongue with red points and thick, dark-yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds to the Qi level of measles.
1502
EYE COLOUR
Yellow (Sclera)
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Damp-Heat with predominance of Heat
Bright-yellow sclera like tangerine peel, thirst, dry mouth, a feeling
of heat, bitter taste, epigastric fullness, a sticky taste, a feeling of
heaviness of the head and body, Red tongue with sticky yellow
tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat with predominance of Dampness
Dull-yellow sclera, thirst without desire to drink, epigastric
fullness, a sticky taste, abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness
of the head and body, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Dull, dark-yellow sclera, epigastric fullness, a sticky taste,
abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body,
cold limbs, loose stools, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow
pulse.
Toxic Heat
Deep-yellow sclera, bloodshot eyes, fever, a feeling of heat,
agitation, red skin rashes, boils, headache, Red tongue with red
points and thick, sticky, dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Light-yellow sclera, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood stasis
Dark, dull-yellow or brown sclera, dark rings under the eyes,
1503
headache, abdominal pain, agitation, Purple tongue, Wiry or
Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
could be the Heart or Liver.
Red (Sclera)
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Liver-Fire
Red eyes, burning eyes, painful eyes, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red eyes, painful eyes, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue
ulcers, mental restlessness, feeling agitated, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Red eyes, blurred vision, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, dull occipital
or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
malar flush, dry eyes, blurred vision, lower backache, dry throat,
dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night sweating, dry
stools, scanty menstruation, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red eyes with sudden onset, itchy eyes, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1504
Lung-Heat or Phlegm-Heat
Red eyes, flaring of nostrils, red face, fever, cough with profuse
yellow sputum, a feeling of muzziness of the head, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, breathlessness, thirst, a feeling of heat,
chest ache, tongue with sticky yellow tongue coating, Overflowing-
Rapid or Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Red eyes, especially the inner corner, headache from occiput to top
of head and eyes, a feeling of heat, burning on urination, difficult
urination, scanty dark urine, sticky yellow tongue coating on the
root, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Bluish-Greenish (Sclera)
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
‘Bluish-greenish’ is a translation of the Chinese colour 
qing,
which in certain pathologies (such as Cold) refers to a bluish
colour and in others (such as Liver patterns) to a greenish colour.
Liver-Wind 
Greenish sclera, headaches, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Internal Cold
Bluish sclera, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, abdominal pain, chronic
pain, abundant pale urine, Pale tongue, Tight-Slow pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved and
on whether it is Full- or Empty-Cold.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Bluish sclera, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor
memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
1505
Dark (Sclera)
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Phlegm
Dark, brownish sclera, a feeling of muzziness of the head, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heaviness, sputum in the
throat, dizziness, nausea, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Dark sclera, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night sweating,
dry stools, nocturnal emissions, scanty menstruation or amenor-
rhoea, delayed cycle, infertility, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Severe Full-Heat
Dark sclera, a feeling of heat, thirst, a feeling of agitation, mental
restlessness, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Pale Corners
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Blood deficiency 
Pale corners, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, numbness, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Other symptoms depend on the organ involved, which may be
the Liver or Heart.
Yang deficiency
Pale corners, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, tiredness, Pale and wet
1506
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Spleen or Kidneys.
Red Corners
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Heat of the Liver, Heart or Lungs may manifest with a redness in
the corners of the eyes and this may not necessarily coincide with
the areas described by the Five Wheels (see 
Chapter 6, p. 78
 
).
Liver-Fire
Redness of either corner of the eye, pain in the eyes, headaches,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue
with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red inner corner, pain in the eyes, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Heat
Red inner corner, red face, cough, slight breathless-ness, a feeling
of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
 
Slight redness of either corner, blurred vision, floaters in the eyes,
dry eyes, diminished night vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, insomnia, scanty menstruation or heavy menstrual
bleeding (if Empty-Heat is severe), red cheekbones, cramps,
withered and brittle nails, very dry hair and skin, anxiety, a feeling
of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, Red tongue without coating, Floating-
1507
Empty Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight redness of the inner corner, malar flush, palpitations,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, mental
restlessness, dry mouth and throat, a feeling of heat in the
evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder
tip and without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight redness of the inner corner, dry cough or with scanty, sticky
sputum which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at
night, weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a
feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat,
thin body or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid tongue.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Slight redness of the inner corner, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, scanty dark urine,
insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Damp-Heat
Red corners, yellow, sticky discharge from the eyes, red and
swollen eyelids, epigastric fullness, a sticky taste, thirst with no
desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a
feeling of heat, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red corners with sudden onset, itchy eyes, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1508
EYELIDS
Stye
Heat in Lungs and Spleen
Stye on the upper eyelid, red eyes, tears flowing from the eyes,
swollen and hard eyelids, pain in the eye, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
thirst, red face, burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive
hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry stools,
scanty dark urine, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in Lungs and Stomach
Stye on the lower eyelid, red eyes, tears flowing from the eyes,
swollen and hard eyelids, pain in the eye, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, Red tongue with yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Chronic styes on the upper eyelid that come and go and are
aggravated by overexertion, swollen and soft eyelids, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale
or sallow complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor
digestion, undigested food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal
headache, excessive vaginal discharge, Pale tongue with sticky
coating, Soggy pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Stye, red and swollen eyelids, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
1509
pulse.
Red Eyelids
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Red eyelids, discharge from the eye, swollen eyelids, painful and
itchy eyes, a feeling of heaviness of the head, dull headache, a
feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower
abdomen, poor appetite, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea,
loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Redness and heat of the upper eyelids, red and dry lips, burning
epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the nose,
dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty
dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Redness and heat of the lower eyelids, burning epigastric pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Red eyelids with sudden onset, red eyes, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose 
with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Dark Eyelids
1510
Kidney deficiency
Dark eyelids, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Cold-Phlegm
Greyish, dull eyelids like soot, cough with expectoration of watery
white sputum, feeling cold, cold hands and feet, nausea, vomiting,
a feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, dull-white
complexion, pale urine, Pale and Swollen tongue with wet white
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Dark, red and swollen eyelids, a feeling of heaviness and
muzziness of the head, a feeling of heat, red face, greasy skin, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat,
expectoration of yellow sputum, dizziness, nausea, Red and
Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Dark eyelids, a dull-yellow complexion, severe dizziness, blurred
vision, tremors, numbness/tingling of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or
Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Green Eyelids
Stomach-Cold
Green eyelids, severe pain in the epigastrium, a feeling of cold,
cold limbs, preference for warmth, vomiting of clear fluids (which
may alleviate the pain), nausea, aggravation by swallowing cold
fluids, which are quickly vomited, preference for warm liquids,
thick white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Pale Eyelids
Blood deficiency 
1511
Pale eyelids, pale inside the eyelids, dull-pale complexion, dry hair,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs,
scanty menstruation, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Yang deficiency
Pale eyelids, paleness inside the eyelids, a feeling of cold, cold
limbs, loose stools, abundant clear urination, tiredness, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Retention of food 
Pale colour inside the eyelids surrounded by yellow, fullness, pain
and distension of the epigastrium, which are relieved by vomiting,
nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation,
belching, insomnia, loose stools or constipation, poor appetite,
thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
Swollen Eyelids
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Swollen, red and itchy eyelids, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Swollen and dry eyelids, poor appetite, poor digestion, retching,
gnawing hunger, loss of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth
and lips, dry stools, thin body, sallow complexion with red tip of
the nose, night sweating, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar
flush, Red tongue without coating and transversal cracks on the
sides, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Heat
1512
Swollen and red eyelids, red and dry lips, burning
epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the nose,
mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine,
yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Water overflowing
Gradual swelling of the eyelids, pale eyelids, oedema of the face
and hands, cold hands and feet, scanty urination, pale complexion,
a feeling of cold, loose stools, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Cold-Phlegm
Gradual swelling of the eyelids, pale eyelids, cough with
expectoration of white watery sputum, a feeling of cold, cold hands
and feet, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of oppression of the chest and
epigastrium, dull-white complexion, pale urine, Pale and Swollen
tongue with wet white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Boil On The Eyelid
Toxic Heat in the Stomach
Boil on the lower eyelid, red eyes, painful eyes, swollen eyelids,
burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding
gums, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting
soon after eating, a feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red
with a thick, dry, dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Yin
Chronic boil on the eyelid that comes and goes, shaped like a
small bean, pale in colour, dry eyes, dull pain of the eye, tiredness,
shortness of breath, weak/hoarse voice, spontaneous daytime
sweating, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, loose
stools, tongue Pale or normal-coloured without coating, Empty or
Floating-Empty pulse.
1513
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic boils on the upper eyelid that come and go and may move
from eye to eye, aggravated by overexertion, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat
Chronic boils on the upper eyelid that come and go, greasy skin,
sinus problems, facial ache, headache with a feeling of heaviness
of the head, sticky taste, a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium/abdomen, epigastric/abdominal pain, poor appetite, a
sticky taste, a feeling of heaviness of the body, thirst without a
desire to drink, nausea, vomiting, loose stools, dull-yellow
complexion like tangerine peel, Pale tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Soggy-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Boil of the eyelid with sudden onset, red and itchy eyes, aversion
to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow
discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst,
swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Pain Of The Eyelids
Heat in Lungs and Spleen
Pain of the upper eyelid, red eyes, tears flowing from the eyes,
swollen and hard eyelids, pain in the eye, headache, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive
hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry stools,
scanty dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in Lungs and Stomach
Pain of the lower eyelid, red eyes, tears flowing from the eyes,
swollen and hard eyelids, pain in the eye, cough, slight
1514
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
thirst, red face, burning epigastric pain, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Flapping Eyelids
Blood deficiency with internal Wind 
Flapping eyelids, facial tic, slight tremor of the head or hand or
both, dizziness, blurred vision, unilateral numbness/tingling of a
limb, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry
pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slightly flapping eyelids, a feeling of tiredness of the eyelids, a
desire to shut the eyes, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Flapping of the eyelids with sudden onset, itchy eyes, aversion to
cold, fever, occipital headache, stiff neck, sneezing, body aches,
tongue with thin white coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Drooping Eyelids
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Drooping eyelids, aggravated by overexertion and alleviated by
rest, depression, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, a bearing-down feeling, prolapse of uterus, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Drooping eyelids, blurred vision, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
1515
voice, tiredness, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Liver and Kidney deficiency
Drooping eyelids, dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness,
tinnitus, lower backache.
Other symptoms depend on whether there is Yin or Yang
deficiency.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Drooping eyelids, irritability, headache, chest pain, abdominal
distension, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Drooping eyelids, red and swollen eyelids, burning epigastric pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Drooping of the eyelids, aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache,
stiff neck, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
Loss Of Control Of The Eyelids
‘Loss of control of the eyelid’ indicates a condition in which the
patient cannot open the eyes, the eyelids tremble, and there is loss
of voluntary control of the eyelids; this condition is more common
in children.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Loss of control of both eyelids, uncomfortable sensation of the
eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
1516
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Loss of control of both eyelids, trembling eyelids, greenish
complexion, irritability, abdominal distension and pain, alternation
of constipation and diarrhoea, stools sometimes dry and bitty
(small pieces) and sometimes loose, flatulence, tiredness, tongue
normal coloured or slightly Red on the sides, pulse Wiry on the left
and Weak on the right.
Wind-Heat affecting the Liver channel
Loss of control of both eyelids, eyelids trembling upwards and
downwards and from side to side as if blown by the wind, fever,
aversion to cold, tongue Red in the front and with a thin white
coating, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Childhood Nutritional Impairment 
Loss of control of both eyelids, trembling eyelids, streaming eyes,
uncomfortable sensation of the eyes, red sclera, worse in the
afternoon, abdominal distension, diarrhoea, thin body, sticky
tongue coating, Weak pulse.
Nodules Within The Eyelids
In Western medicine, nodules within the eyelids correspond to
external hordeolum or meibomian cyst. External hordeolum (stye)
is a small abscess caused by an acute staphylococcal infection of a
lash follicle. A meibomian cyst is a chronic lipogranulomatous
inflammation secondary to retention of sebum caused by
obstruction of a duct of a meibomian gland.
Damp-Phlegm obstructing the Spleen
Nodules within the eyelids, shaped like grains of rice or small
beans, discharge from the eyes, neither painful nor itchy, eyelids
not red, nodules movable, a feeling of oppression of the chest and
epigastrium, somnolence, nausea, sputum in the throat,
muzziness of the head, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
1517
Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Heat obstructing the Spleen
Nodules within the eyelids, shaped like grains of rice or small
beans, yellow discharge from the eyes, painful eyelids, red eyelids,
nodules movable, a feeling of oppression of the chest and
epigastrium, somnolence, 
nausea, sputum in the throat,
muzziness of the head, thirst without a desire to drink, a feeling of
heat, Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Small Red Grains Inside The Eyelids
‘Small red grains inside the eyelids’ corresponds to vernal
keratoconjunctivitis in Western medicine. This is an allergic
disorder which is common in atopic patients but occurs also in
non-atopic patients; it manifests with intense itching,
lachrymation, photophobia, burning and a sensation of a foreign
body in the eye.
Damp-Heat in the Spleen
Small red grains inside the eyelids, yellow discharge from the eyes,
itchy eyes, a feeling of heaviness of the head, fullness of the
epigastrium, epigastric or abdominal pain, sticky taste, thirst with
no desire to drink, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, thirst, nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of
heaviness of the head, dull-yellow complexion, bitter taste, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Heat affecting the Spleen channel
Small red grains inside the eyelids with sudden onset, red eyes,
sore throat, itchy throat, itchy eyes, aversion to cold, fever,
headache, tongue Red in the front or sides, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Redness Inside The Lower Lids
Full-Heat
1518
Redness inside the lower lids, thirst, mental restlessness, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Thin, red line inside the lower lids, thirst with a desire to drink in
small sips, mental restlessness, a feeling of heat in the evening,
dry throat at night, night sweating, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
GLAUCOMA
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat rebelling upwards
Glaucoma, eye pain, red eyes, red face, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, a slight feeling of oppression of the chest, irritability,
premenstrual tension, premenstrual breast distension, a feeling of
lump in the throat, a feeling of heat, red face, thirst, propensity to
outbursts of anger, heavy periods, tongue Red on the sides, Wiry
pulse especially on the left side and slightly Rapid.
Liver-Fire
Glaucoma, red eyes, eye pain, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Glaucoma, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night
sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in
the evening, malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
lower backache, scanty dark urine, insomnia, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Empty-Cold in the Liver channel
Glaucoma, eye pain, fullness and distension of the hypogastrium
1519
with pain which refers downwards to the scrotum and testis and
upwards to the hypochon-drium, and is alleviated by warmth,
vertical headache, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, vomiting
of clear watery fluid or dry vomiting, Pale tongue with a wet and
white coating, Deep-Tight-Slow.
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE
EYES
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 42
Liver-Fire 
Pronounced feeling of distension of the eye, pain in the eye,
bloodshot eyes, dry eyes, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Feeling of distension of the eye, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Feeling of distension of the eye, tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, tics, convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of
limbs, stiff neck, opisthotonos, in severe cases coma, Stiff, Moving
or Deviated tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the Lungs and Spleen
Feeling of distension of the eye, enlarged pupil, chronic cough
coming in bouts with profuse sticky white sputum which is easy to
expectorate, pasty-white complexion, a feeling of oppression in the
chest and epigastrium, shortness of breath, wheezing, nausea,
epigastric fullness, Swollen tongue with a sticky white coating,
Slippery pulse.
1520
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Slight feeling of distension of the eye, blurred vision, dry eyes, a
feeling of heat in the eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, malar flush, lower backache, dry throat, dry hair and
skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in
the evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
A feeling of distension of the eyes when tense, frontal headache,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
Feeling of distension of the eyes, swollen red eyelids, fullness/pain
of the hypochondrium, abdomen or epigastrium, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on
urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red
tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
EYEBALL
Protruding Eyeball
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
In Western medicine, protruding eyeball is called prop-tosis and
in 80% of cases it is due to a thyroid ophthal-mopathy; it may also
be due to a tumour in the orbit of the eye.
Liver-Fire
Protruding eyeball, pain in the eye, bloodshot eyes, headache, red
face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
1521
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Protruding eyeball, pain in the eye, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Phlegm 
Protruding eyeball, pain in the eye, a feeling of distension of the
eye, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness,
a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
 
Protruding eyeball, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
tics, convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of the limbs, stiff
neck, opisthotonos, in severe cases coma, Stiff, Moving or Deviated
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind with Phlegm-Heat
Protruding eyeball, dark sclera, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, tics, convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of the
limbs, stiff neck, opisthotonos, in severe cases coma, feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, a feeling of heat, a
feeling of heaviness, Red and Swollen tongue which may also be
Stiff, Moving or Deviated, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Protruding eyeball, an uncomfortable sensation of the eye, a
feeling of distension of the eye, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-Blood stasis
1522
Protruding eyeball, pain in the eye, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, painful periods, Purple tongue, Wiry or
Firm pulse.
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
Protruding eyeball, eye ache, earache, headache, fullness/pain of
the hypochondrium, abdomen or epigastrium, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on
urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red
tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Protruding and painful eyeball, red sclera, gum in the eye, a
feeling of heat, agitation, fever, Red tongue with red points and
thick, sticky, dry dark-yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang
Slightly protruding eyeball, dizziness, floaters, tinnitus, night
sweating, lower backache, cold limbs, loose stools.
Other symptoms and signs, including tongue and pulse, depend
on whether there is a predominance of Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Slightly protruding eyeball, blurred vision, poor appetite, loose
stools, weak voice, tiredness, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Rebellious Lung-Qi (Lung-Qi not descending)
Protruding eyeball, chronic cough or asthma, a feeling of
oppression of the chest.
1523
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Protruding eyeball with sudden onset, pain in the eye, itchy eyes,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Sunken Eyeball
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Severe, chronic, Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Sunken eyeballs, drooping eyelids, shortness of breath, slight
cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, dull-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency following food poisoning
Sunken eyeballs following profuse vomiting and diarrhoea, poor
appetite, loose stools, Empty pulse.
Collapse of Yin or Yang
Sunken eyeballs with sudden onset, drooping eyelids, Deep-
Scattered pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is collapse
of Yin or of Yang.
Scaly Eyeballs
In Western medicine, ‘scaly eyeballs’ corresponds to
blepharoconjunctivitis, which is characterized by burning, itching,
mild photophobia, dilated blood vessels and brittle fibrinous
scales.
Lung-Heat
1524
Scaly eyeballs, burning eyes, red eyes, desire to keep eyes shut,
streaming eyes, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat,
chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Scaly eyeballs, burning eyes, red eyes, palpitations, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, 
anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
bothered’, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids,
a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue, redder on the tip, no coating, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Scaly eyeballs with sudden onset, itchy eyes, burning eyes,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Quivering Eyeball
This is called nystagmus in Western medicine.
Internal Wind (acute stage of Wind-stroke)
Quivering eyeballs, open eyes, unconsciousness, clenched fists,
urinary retention, Red tongue, Rapid pulse.
Empty-Wind from Blood deficiency 
 
Quivering eyeballs, slight tremor of the head or hand or both,
facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision, unilateral numbness/tingling of
a limb, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry
pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Quivering eyeballs, poor bone development in children, softening
1525
of the bones in adults, deafness, weakness of knees and legs, poor
memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the hair,
weakness of sexual activity, lower backache, infertility, sterility,
dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-Empty or
Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs against a
background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, and Pale tongue and Deep-
Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Quivering eyeballs, irritability, abdominal distension and pain,
alternation of constipation and diarrhoea, stools sometimes dry
and bitty and sometimes loose, flatulence, tiredness, poor
appetite, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Eyeball Turning Up
The eyeball turning up is seen in acute conditions of internal
Wind; it is also seen in chronic conditions, in which case the
eyeball turns upwards slightly so that the white sclera can be seen
under the eye.
Heat generating Wind (Blood level of the Four Levels)
Eyeballs turning up, eyes open, coma, tremor, macular rash, Red
tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Stagnant Blood generating Wind
Eyeballs turning up, open eyes, open mouth, dribbling from the
corners of the mouth, dark complexion, headache, dark rings
under eyes, chest pain, Purple and Deviated tongue, Wiry pulse.
Internal Wind
Eyeballs turning up, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry
pulse.
1526
Kidney deficiency
Eyeballs slightly turning up, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus,
exhaustion.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
ECCHYMOSIS UNDER CONJUNCTIVA
In Western medicine, ecchymosis under conjunctiva corresponds
to a subconjunctival haemorrhage, which may manifest with
excessive lachrymation, gritty sensation, retrobulbar discomfort
and photophobia.
Liver-Fire
Large ecchymosis under conjunctiva, red and painful eyes,
headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine,
Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Small ecchymosis under conjunctiva, dizziness, tinnitus, poor
memory, hardness of hearing, night sweating, 
dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to sip fluids, lower backache, constipation, scanty
dark urine, tiredness, anxiety, insomnia, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Ecchymosis under conjunctiva with sudden onset, burning and red
eyes, aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny
nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Dry-Heat invading the Lungs
1527
Ecchymosis under conjunctiva, headache, red and burning eyes,
dry eyes, dry throat, dry cough, Red tongue with dry coating, Fine
pulse.
Liver Phlegm-Fire
Ecchymosis under conjunctiva, eye ache, protruding eyeball, red
face, red eyes, palpitations, mental restlessness, thirst, red face, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, dark urine, expectoration of
phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, agitation, mental confusion, incoherent speech,
rash behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people, uncontrolled
laughter or crying, shouting, muttering to oneself, depression,
manic behaviour, Red tongue with redder-swollen tip, Heart crack
with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
RED VEINS/MEMBRANE
Red Veins In The Eyes
‘Red veins in the eyes’ indicates visible veins on the sclera running
horizontally from the corners of the eyes. In Western medicine this
corresponds to an engorgement of the subconjunctival vessels.
Liver-Fire
Large red veins in the eyes, running horizontally from the outer
corner, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Small red veins in the eyes running horizontally from the outer
corner, blurred vision, dry eyes, diminished night vision, red eyes,
floaters, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia,
scanty menstruation or heavy menstrual bleeding (if Empty-Heat
is severe), red cheekbones, cramps, withered and brittle nails, very
1528
dry hair and skin, anxiety, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red veins in the eyes, running horizontally from the inner corner,
red painful eyes, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Red veins in the eyes running horizontally from the inner corner,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, mental restlessness, dry mouth and throat, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat,
Red tongue with redder tip and without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Thin, red veins in the eyes, dry eyes, poor bone development in
children, softening of bones in adults, deafness, weakness of the
knees and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature
greying of the hair, weakness from sexual activity, lower backache,
infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
Drooping Red Membrane
‘Drooping red membrane’ indicates a condition in which fine
streaks of blood on the upper border of the pupil gradually grow
into a red membrane, which spreads downward covering the pupil.
In Western 
medicine, this corresponds to trachoma; the pathogen
of this disease is carried by flies and it is usually seen only in
1529
developing countries.
Liver-Fire
Fine blood streaks becoming a membrane, often shaped like a
half-moon, covering the pupil, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Lungs and Spleen
Small ulcers inside the upper eyelid which give rise to streaks of
blood from the upper border of the pupil, painful and itchy eyes,
cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring
of the nostrils, thirst, red face, burning epigastric/abdominal pain,
excessive hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry
stools, scanty dark urine, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Heat affecting the Liver and Lung channels
Red eyes, fine streaks of blood over the eye, thickening of the
eyelid, pain in the eye, sticky discharge in the eye, streaming eyes,
a feeling of heat, slight thirst, yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Red Membrane In The Corner Of The Eye
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
‘Red membrane in the corner of the eye’ indicates a condition in
which a large red membrane, shaped like the wing of a fly, extends
horizontally from the corner of the eyes towards the pupil,
eventually covering the pupil. In Western medicine, this
corresponds to ptery-gium, which consists in overgrowth of the
cornea by the conjunctiva; this disease is usually seen only in hot
and dry climates.
Liver-Fire
Membrane in the corner of the eye that looks like butter, later
1530
becoming dark red, pain in the eyes, dry eyes, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red membrane in the corners of the eye, rather thick, pain in the
eye, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental
restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with
redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Red membrane in the corners of the eyes running horizontally
from the inner corner, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, mental restlessness, dry mouth and
throat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night
sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip and without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Lung channel
Red membrane in the corner of the eye extending horizontally
towards the pupil, pain in the eye, cough, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Red membrane in the corner of the eye with a small head,
constipation, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, abdominal
pain, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry stools, scanty
dark urine, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Pale red membrane in the corner of the eye, varying in thickness,
dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to
1531
drink in small sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine,
five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
CORNEA
Corneal Opacity
In Western medicine, corneal opacity may be caused by trauma,
bacterial or viral infections or systemic diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis or lupus erythematosus.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Corneal opacity over the pupil, red in colour, no pain or streaming
of the eye, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory,
night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Corneal opacity over the pupil, red in colour, streaming eyes,
blurred vision, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tiredness,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, palpitations, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Wind-Heat affecting the Liver channel
Corneal opacity over the pupil, bright white in colour, oozing of
fluid, pain in the eye, streaming eyes, itchy eyes, headache, yellow
tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Corneal opacity over the pupil, grey or yellow in colour, fine
granular nebulas in pupil, greyish-white or yellowish in colour
with indistinct borders, sinking in the centre, which may cover the
whole pupil, nebulas which may be densely or sparsely
distributed, or extend sharply like tree branches, or mat together
into patches so as to be covered by a yellow membrane that looks
1532
like fat, pain in the eye, eyes streaming with a thick fluid, a feeling
of heat, thirst, Red tongue with red point and thick, sticky yellow
coating, Deep-Rapid-Slippery pulse.
Scarring After Corneal Opacity
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Scarring after corneal opacity, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine,
tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Scarring after corneal opacity, pale red sclera, dry eyes, no appetite
or slight hunger but no desire to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull
or slightly burning epigastric pain, dry mouth and throat
especially in the afternoon, thirst but no desire to drink, or a desire
to drink in small sips, a slight feeling of fullness after eating,
normal-coloured tongue without coating or without coating in the
centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Scarring after corneal opacity, red or dark yellow sclera, looking
like an agate (a precious stone with multicoloured stripes),
abdominal distension and pain, headache, Purple tongue, Wiry
pulse.
WHITE SPECKS
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
White specks may occur on the sclera or pupil and may be
bright or dull white.
Phlegm obstructing the Lungs
Dull-white specks on the sclera/pupil, a feeling of oppression in
the chest, a feeling of heaviness, dizziness, nausea, phlegm in the
1533
throat, cough with expectoration of sticky sputum, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dull-white specks on the sclera, dry eyes, blurred vision, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or
vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of limbs, dry
throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools,
scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Yang deficiency with internal Cold
Bright-white specks on the sclera, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
abdominal pain, loose stools, tiredness, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
PUPILS
Red Ring Around The Pupil
In Western medicine, ‘red ring around the pupil’ corresponds to
anterior uveitis or iritis, the main symptoms of which are
photophobia, pain, redness, decreased vision and lachrymation.
Liver-Fire
Red ring around the pupil, contracted pupil, pain in the eye
aggravated by heat and alleviated by the application of cold,
streaming eye, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Red ring around the pupil with yellow fluid flowing upwards, pain
in the eye aggravated by heat and alleviated by the application of
cold, streaming eyes, burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive
1534
hunger, red tip of the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry
stools, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, foul breath, Red tongue
with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Qi deficiency with Internal Wind
Pale-red ring around the pupil, eye not painful, chronic condition,
eyelashes falling out, fine tremor of the hand, facial tic, tiredness,
poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, shortness of breath, Pale
tongue, Weak pulse.
White Membrane On The Pupil In Children
‘White membrane on the pupil in children’ is called 
gan yi
 
in
Chinese, which means Childhood Nutritional Impairment Nebula;
it consists of a white membrane covering the pupil, often starting
with the symptom of decreased vision at night. As its name
implies, it occurs in children suffering from nutritional
impairment. A nebula is a translucent, greyish corneal haze,
scarring or opacity.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness 
White membrane on the pupil, decreased vision at night, pain in
the eye, flickering eyelids, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, slight depression, a tendency
to obesity, abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste,
poor digestion, undigested food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal
headache, excessive vaginal discharge, Pale tongue with sticky
coating, Soggy pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency 
White membrane on the pupil, frequent blinking, oozing of fluid,
poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale
complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Retention of food 
White membrane on the pupil, decreased vision at night, pain in
1535
the eye, thin body, fullness, pain and distension of the
epigastrium, which are relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting of
sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, insomnia,
loose stools or constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating,
Full-Slippery pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency 
Greyish membrane on the pupil, decreased vision at night,
uncomfortable sensation in the eye, dull in colour, corneal erosion,
lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, impotence, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, loose
stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie
down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Yellow Fluid Between Pupil And Iris
In Western medicine, yellow fluid between the pupil and iris
corresponds to hypopyon, which is a sterile pus formation in the
anterior chamber, that is, between the back of the cornea and iris.
Diseases such as pneumo-coccal keratitis or pseudomonas
keratitis could show this phenomenon.
Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Yellow fluid between the pupil and the iris streaming upwards,
shaped like a crescent, pain in the eye with acute onset,
photophobia, streaming eyes, sticky discharge from the eyes,
burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the
nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat,
scanty dark urine, foul breath, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
Yellow fluid between the pupil and the iris streaming upwards,
uncomfortable sensation of the eye, chronic 
condition, discomfort
or dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and better with
1536
pressure or massage, no appetite, preference for warm drinks and
foods, vomiting of clear fluid, no thirst, cold and weak limbs,
tiredness, pale complexion, slight abdominal distension after
eating, loose stools, feeling of cold, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Yellow fluid between the pupil and iris streaming upwards, eye
ache, sticky discharge from the eyes, greasy skin, sinus problems,
sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of fullness of
the epigastrium, epigastric or abdominal pain, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, nausea, vomiting, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, headache
with a feeling of heaviness of the head, dull-yellow complexion,
bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Bleeding Between Pupil And Iris
Liver-Fire
Bleeding between pupil and iris, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency and Blood deficiency 
 
Bleeding between pupil and iris, uncomfortable sensation of the
eyes, streaming eyes, red eyes, blurred vision, dry eyes, dizziness,
tinnitus, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of limbs, dry throat, dry hair and
skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation
or amenorrhoea, normal coloured without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Deficient Spleen-Qi not holding Blood
Bleeding between pupil and iris, tiredness, poor appetite, loose
1537
stools, pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Dilated Pupils
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dilated pupils, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Yin
Dilated pupil, uncomfortable sensation of the eye, floaters, blurred
vision, tiredness, shortness of breath, weak/hoarse voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, loose stools, tongue Pale or normal coloured
without coating, Empty or Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dilated pupil, floaters, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory,
scanty dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in
the evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Wind with Phlegm 
Dilated pupil, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Collapse of Yang
Dilated pupils, profuse sweating, cyanosis of the lips, open eyes,
open mouth, open fists, incontinence, Pale and Short tongue,
Minute or Scattered pulse.
Contracted Pupils
1538
Liver-Fire
Contracted pupils, bloodshot eyes, pain in the eyes, headaches,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue
with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Contracted pupils, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis in the Connecting channels of the
Brain (Eye System)
Contracted pupils, pain in the eyes, headache, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Toxic Heat at the Blood level
Contracted pupils, mental confusion, tremor, macular rash, fever
at night, Red tongue with red points and no coating, Fine-Rapid
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Contracted pupils, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a
feeling of fullness of the epigastrium, epigastric or abdominal
pain, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness of the body, nausea,
vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat,
scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the
head, dull-yellow complexion, bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Contracted pupils with sudden onset, aversion to cold, fever,
cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen
tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on
front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
1539
STARING, FIXED EYES
Observation,
 
Chapter 6
Heart-Fire
Staring, fixed eyes, pain in the eyes, palpitations, thirst, agitation,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter
taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Heart
Staring, fixed eyes, protruding eyeballs, a feeling of muzziness of
the head, palpitations, anxiety, insomnia, thirst, a feeling of heat, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, manic behaviour, Red-Swollen
tongue with redder tip, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
CLOSED EYES
‘Closed eyes’ refers to the inability of the patient to keep the eyes
open.
Excess of Yin
Closed eyes, cold limbs, open palms, Pale tongue, Deep-Full-Slow
pulse.
Heat in febrile disease (Blood level)
Closed eyes, fever at night, macular rash, Red tongue without
coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Wind-stroke (acute stage)
Closed eyes, unconsciousness, open palms, incontinence of urine,
cold limbs, Pale and Short tongue, Deep-Full-Slow pulse.
OPEN EYES
Open eyes’ refers to the inability of the patient to keep the eyes
1540
shut.
Wind-stroke (acute stage)
Open eyes, unconsciousness, closed palms, urinary retention, hot
limbs, Red tongue, Rapid pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Open eyes, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
INVERTED EYELASHES
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Inverted eyelashes, no pain, itchy eyes, aggravated by overexertion,
tiredness, weak voice, shortness of breath, loose stools, poor
appetite, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Inverted eyelashes, red and swollen eyelids, sticky taste, thirst
with no desire to drink, a feeling of fullness of the epigastrium,
epigastric or abdominal pain, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness
of the body, nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of
heaviness of the head, dull-yellow complexion, bitter taste, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Empty-Cold in the Bladder
Inverted eyelashes, a feeling of cold, cold legs, frequent, pale and
abundant urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Inverted eyelashes, red and itchy eyes, tears flowing from the eyes,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
1541
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in
the chest area or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
CATARACT
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Cataract, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension,
pale complexion, loose stools, discomfort in the epigastrium, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Cataract, tiredness, dry eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dizziness,
tinnitus, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry throat, dry hair and
skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation
or amenorrhoea, normal coloured without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Cataract, dry eyes, Dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache, scanty
dark urine, tiredness, slight anxiety, palpitations, insomnia,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
1542
CHAPTER 62
 
NECK,
SHOULDERS AND
UPPER BACK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
NECK AND SHOULDERS
Stiff neck
Rigidity of the neck
Neck pain
Soft neck
Deviated neck
Wide neck
Thin neck
Swollen neck glands
Pulsation of the carotid artery
Shoulder ache
Frozen shoulder
1543
UPPER BACK
Upper backache
Cold upper back
Hot upper back
Stiffness of the back as if wearing a tight belt
NECK AND SHOULDERS
Stiff Neck
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Wind-Damp Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Stiff neck, body aches, a feeling of heaviness of the body.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Stiff neck when tense, tense upper back muscles, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Stiff neck, tense upper back muscles, headache, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Slightly stiff neck, dizziness, tinnitus, lower backache.
Other symptoms depend on whether there is a Kidney-Yin or
Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Stiff neck with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, occipital
headache, stiff neck, sneezing, body aches, tongue with thin white
coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
1544
Liver-Wind 
Stiff neck, headaches, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Rigidity Of The Neck
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Cold Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Rigidity of the neck with acute onset which may continue for
months, neck ache that is aggravated by exposure to cold and
damp weather and ameliorated by the application of heat.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Rigidity of the neck which is aggravated by emotional upsets,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Rigidity of the neck, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Rigidity of the neck, stiff neck, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, tics, tremor of limbs, Stiff, Moving or Deviated tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Neck Pain
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 36
Wind-Damp Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Neck pain, stiff neck, body aches, a feeling of heaviness of the
body.
Liver-Qi stagnation
1545
Chronic neck ache, tense upper back muscles, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Chronic neck ache, tense upper back muscles, headache, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Neck pain, stiff neck, aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache,
body aches, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
Liver-Wind 
Neck pain, stiff neck, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Soft Neck
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 10
‘Soft neck’ refers not only to a feeling of softness of the neck on
palpation but also to a subjective feeling of softness and weakness
of the neck, as if the patient found it difficult to keep the head up.
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Soft neck, exhaustion, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Soft neck, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold,
weak knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1546
Deviated Neck
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 10
‘Deviated neck’ indicates the leaning of the neck to one side.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Deviated neck, poor constitution, poor bone development in
children, softening of the bones in adults, deafness, weakness of
the knees and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or
premature greying of the hair, weakness from sexual activity, lower
backache, infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured
tongue and Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence
deficiency occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or
Pale tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of
Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Deviated neck, stiff neck, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Wide Neck
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Qi stagnation with Phlegm
Wide neck, a feeling of a lump in the throat, irritability, phlegm in
the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, abdominal
distension, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Phlegm with Blood stasis
Wide neck, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heaviness, dizziness,
abdominal pain, chest pain, Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry-
Slippery pulse.
Liver-Fire
1547
Wide neck, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Thin Neck
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood 
Thin neck, exhaustion, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Chronic Yin deficiency 
Thin neck, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry throat, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Swollen Neck Glands
Observation,
 
Chapter 10
Invasion of Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat 
Swollen neck glands with acute onset, swollen tonsils, sore throat,
aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or
on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat with Qi and Yin deficiency
Chronic swelling of neck glands which comes and goes, sore throat
that comes and goes, tiredness, breathlessness, weak voice, dry
throat, loose stools, night sweating, tongue without coating in the
centre, Empty or Floating-Empty pulse.
1548
Residual Damp-Heat with Qi deficiency
Chronic swelling of neck glands which comes and goes, aggravated
by periods of overwork and alleviated by periods of rest, chronic
sore throat that comes and goes, a feeling of heaviness, muscle
ache, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Soggy pulse.
This condition is very common in postviral fatigue syndrome.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis
Chronic, swollen neck glands, dark colour on the neck, dark
complexion, chest pain, headache, abdominal pain, Purple tongue,
Wiry-Rapid or Choppy-Rapid pulse.
Pulsation Of The Carotid Artery
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 10
‘Pulsation of the carotid artery’ indicates an excessive pulsation
of this artery which is clearly visible.
Kidney and Heart-Yang deficiency with Water
overflowing to the Heart 
Pulsation of the carotid artery, oedema especially of the legs and
ankles, a cold feeling in legs and back, fullness and distension of
abdomen, soreness of the lower back, a feeling of cold, scanty clear
urination, palpitations, breathlessness, vomiting of watery, frothy
white fluid, cold hands, Pale and Swollen tongue with a wet white
coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Fine-Slippery pulse.
Chronic Phlegm in the Lungs 
Pulsation of the carotid artery, sputum in the throat, wheezing,
breathlessness, inability to lie down, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, cough with expectoration of profuse sputum, Swollen
tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Shoulder Ache
Damp-Cold
1549
Ache in the shoulder region that may extend to the scapula region,
a feeling of heaviness, numbness, coldness on palpation.
Wind-Cold
Acute pain in the shoulder joint that is aggravated by exposure to
cold and application of heat, a feeling of cold.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Pain in the shoulder joint, rigidity of the shoulder, a feeling of
distension, Purple tongue.
Frozen Shoulder
Cold
Severe pain in the shoulder joint that is aggravated by exposure to
cold and alleviated by application of heat, inability to abduct the
arm, a feeling of cold.
Damp-Cold
Severe pain in the shoulder joint that is aggravated by exposure to
cold and dampness and alleviated by the application of heat,
inability to abduct the arm, a feeling of heaviness and numbness
of the arm, feeling of cold.
Blood stasis
Severe pain in the shoulder joint that is worse at night, rigidity of
the shoulder joint, Purple tongue.
UPPER BACK
Upper Backache
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 37
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Upper backache, stiffness of the neck and top of the shoulders,
aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache, stiff neck, sneezing,
1550
body aches, tongue with thin white coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Upper backache that may be worse at night, rigidity of the neck,
pain relieved by exercise and aggravated by rest, tense muscles,
headache, abdominal distension and pain, Purple tongue, Wiry
pulse.
Damp-Cold
Severe pain in the upper back that is aggravated by exposure to
cold and dampness and alleviated by the application of heat, a
feeling of heaviness and numbness of the upper back, a feeling of
cold.
Liver-Yang rising
Pain and stiffness of the upper back, stiff neck, tense muscles,
headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts
of anger, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Pain and stiffness of the upper back, stiff neck, tense muscles,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Cold Upper Back
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 37
Invasion of Wind-Cold
A feeling of cold of the upper back, stiff neck and shoulders,
aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache, stiff neck, sneezing,
body aches, tongue with thin white coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Yang deficiency
A feeling of cold of the upper back or in general, cold limbs,
tiredness, depression, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1551
Hot Upper Back
Lung-Heat
A feeling of heat of the upper back or in general, cough, slight
breathlessness, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
A feeling of heat in the upper back that is worse at night, dry
cough, weak voice, dry throat with a desire to drink in small sips,
hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue without coating in
the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stiffness Of The Back As If Wearing A Tight
Belt
Girdle Vessel pathology 
A feeling of stiffness of the back and waist as if wearing a belt
which is too tight, backache radiating horizontally to the front or
abdominal pain radiating towards the back, a feeling as if sitting in
cold water, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen as if wearing a
heavy money-belt (ancient texts describe this symptom as ‘feeling
as if wearing a belt with 3000 coins’).
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
A feeling of stiffness of the back and waist as if wearing a belt
which is too tight, a pricking feeling of the skin around the waist,
inability to breathe deeply, fullness of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, mid-
cycle bleeding/pain, pain, urinary difficulty, burning on urination,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and a sticky-yellow
coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
1552
CHAPTER 63
 
CHEST
CHAPTER CONTENTS
COUGH
Acute cough
Chronic cough
Coughing blood
BREATHLESSNESS
WHEEZING
PAIN
Chest pain
Pain in the ribs
FEELINGS IN THE CHEST AND HEART
Feeling of oppression of the chest
Feeling of distension of the chest
Feeling of heat of the chest
Heart feeling vexed
Feeling of stuffiness under the heart
PALPITATIONS
Palpitations under the heart
1553
DISPLACED HEARTBEAT
Heartbeat displaced downwards
Heartbeat displaced upwards
Heartbeat displaced to the left
Heartbeat displaced to the right
Heartbeat below the xyphoid process
ABNORMAL CHEST SHAPE
Protruding chest
Sunken chest
Protruding sternum
Chest sunken on one side
Chest protruding on one side
GYNAECOMASTIA
YAWNING
SIGHING
COUGH
Acute Cough
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Hearing and Smelling,
 
Chapter 53
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Acute cough with expectoration of white sputum, aversion to cold,
fever, itchy throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose
with clear watery discharge, sneezing, occipital headache, body
aches, thin white tongue coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Acute cough with expectoration of yellow sputum, aversion to
cold, fever, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow
1554
discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst,
swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest area
or on front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Dryness
Acute, dry cough, aversion to cold, fever, dry throat, tickly throat,
dry nose, discomfort of the chest, thin, dry white tongue coating,
Floating pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Acute, barking cough following an invasion of external Wind with
profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
thirst, insomnia, agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Acute, barking cough following an invasion of external Wind,
expectoration of scanty yellow sputum, 
slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, 
thirst, red face,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Residual dryness and Phlegm in the Lungs
Acute, dry cough after an invasion of Wind-Heat, difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum after repeated bouts of dry
coughing, persistent tickling sensation in the throat, dry throat,
dry mouth, Swollen and dry tongue, Slippery pulse.
Residual dryness in the Lungs
Acute, dry cough after an invasion of Wind-Heat, repeated bouts of
dry coughing, persistent tickling sensation in the throat, dry
throat, dry mouth, dry tongue.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, coughs following acute upper
respiratory infections are due either to Phlegm-Heat or
to Dryness with Phlegm. For the former I use Qing Qi
1555
Hua Tan Tang 
Clearing Heat-Resolving Phlegm Decoction
 
,
and for the latter Qing Zao Jiu Fei Tang 
Clearing Dryness
and Rescuing the Lungs Decoction
 
.
Chronic Cough
Hearing and Smelling,
 
Chapter 53
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Chronic cough with easy expectoration of profuse white sputum,
rattling sound in the throat, pasty-white complexion, a feeling of
oppression in the chest, shortness of breath, a dislike of lying
down, wheezing, nausea, Swollen tongue with a sticky white
coating, Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Dryness in the Lungs
Chronic, dry cough with a weak sound and occasional, difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum, shortness of breath, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, dry throat, wheezing, pasty dry
complexion, Swollen tongue with a dry sticky coating, Fine-
Slippery pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Chronic cough that is dry or with difficult expectoration of scanty
sputum, weak/hoarse voice, dry mouth and throat, tickly throat,
tiredness, dislike of speaking, thin body or thin chest, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating (or with
rootless coating) in the front part, Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Chronic cough that is dry or with difficult expectoration of scanty
sputum, which may be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at
night, tickly throat, tiredness, dislike of speaking, thin body or thin
chest, night sweating, malar flush, a feeling of heat or a low-grade
fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin body, Red tongue without
1556
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Lung-Dryness
Chronic, dry cough, dry skin, dry throat, dry mouth, thirst, hoarse
voice, dry tongue, Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Chronic, slight cough with a weak sound, slight shortness of
breath, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Chronic cough with expectoration of watery white sputum,
aggravated by exposure to cold, a feeling of cold, cold hands,
phlegm in the throat, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, a feeling of cold of the chest, Swollen and wet tongue with a
sticky white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs 
Chronic, barking cough with a yellow or blood-tinged sputum,
breathlessness, asthma, a feeling of fullness and distension of the
chest and hypochondrium, headache, dizziness, red face, thirst,
bitter taste, bloodshot eyes, scanty dark urine, constipation, Red
tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs
Chronic cough with expectoration of watery, frothy white sputum,
breathlessness, splashing sound in the chest, vomiting of watery,
frothy white sputum, feeling of cold, cough which may be elicited
by a scare, Pale tongue with thick, sticky white coating, Fine-
Slippery or Weak-Floating pulse.
Coughing Blood
Lung-Heat
1557
Cough with blood-tinged sputum, slight breathlessness, a feeling
of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Barking cough with expectoration of blood-tinged sputum,
shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
a feeling of heat, thirst, insomnia, agitation, Red and Swollen
tongue with a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dry cough with difficult expectoration of scanty, blood-tinged
sputum, dry mouth and throat at night, night sweating, tiredness,
malar flush, a feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening,
five-palm heat, thin body, Red tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Cough with blood-tinged sputum, aversion to cold, fever, sore
throat, stuffed or runny nose with yellow discharge, headache,
body aches, slight sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest area or on front part,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slight cough with expectoration of scanty, blood-tinged sputum,
fresh-red blood, tiredness, loose stools, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension, weak voice, slight shortness of breath,
spontaneous sweating, dislike of speaking, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Lung-Heat at the Blood level (Four Levels)
Coughing of blood, fever at night, macular skin eruptions, mental
confusion, night sweating, five-palm heat, dry throat, Red tongue
with red points and without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
1558
BREATHLESSNESS
Hearing and Smelling
 
, 
Chapter 53
The symptom of breathlessness comprises four slightly different
symptoms. These are:
 
• 
 
breathlessness (
Chuan
 
): severe difficulty in breathing
with shortness of breath and raising of the shoulders
• 
 
shortness of breath (
Duan Qi
 
): short, irregular, rapid
breaths without pronounced struggling for breath and
raising of shoulders seen in breathlessness
• 
 
weak breathing (
Qi Shao
 
): weak, low, short breathing
sounds
• 
 
rebellious-Qi breathing (
Shang Qi
 
): rapid short
breaths, cough, a sensation of oppression of the throat
and feeling of energy rising accompanied by a feeling of
anxiety.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Shortness of breath or weak breathing, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white
complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Shortness of breath or weak breathing with difficulty in exhaling,
cough which is dry or with scanty sticky sputum, weak/hoarse
voice, dry mouth and throat, tickly throat, tiredness, dislike of
speaking, thin body or thin chest, night sweating, normal-coloured
tongue without coating (or with rootless coating) in the front part,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidneys not receiving Qi
Shortness of breath or weak breathing with difficulty in inhaling,
rapid and weak breathing, chronic cough/asthma, spontaneous
sweating, cold limbs, cold limbs after sweating, swelling of the
1559
face, thin body, mental listlessness, clear urination during asthma
attack, soreness of the back, dizziness, tinnitus, Pale tongue, Deep-
Weak-Tight pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Shortness of breath, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, a feeling of oppression or distension of the chest,
slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, worry, irritability,
depression, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas,
pulse very slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Acute breathlessness, barking cough with expectoration of blood-
tinged sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, thirst, insomnia,
agitation, Red and Swollen 
tongue with a sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Breathlessness, wheezing, chronic cough coming in bouts with
profuse sticky white sputum which is easy to expectorate, pasty-
white complexion, a feeling of oppression in the chest, dislike of
lying down, wheezing, nausea, Swollen tongue with a sticky white
coating, Slippery pulse.
Lung-Heat
Acute breathlessness, cough with expectoration of scanty yellow
sputum, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red
face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Breathlessness, chronic cough with expectoration of watery white
sputum, aggravated by exposure to cold, a feeling of cold generally
or in the chest, cold hands, phlegm in the throat, dizziness, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen and wet tongue with a
sticky white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
1560
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Shortness of breath with difficulty in inhaling, cough with
expectoration of watery white sputum, a feeling of cold, cold feet,
lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, frequent pale urination, Pale,
Swollen and wet tongue, Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing to the
Lungs 
Severe breathlessness, oedema especially of the legs and ankles, a
feeling of cold in legs and back, fullness and distension of
abdomen, soreness of lower back, a feeling of cold, scanty clear
urination, expectoration of thin, watery frothy sputum, cough, Pale
and Swollen tongue with a wet white coating, Deep-Weak-Slow
pulse.
Phlegm in the Lungs with Lung-Qi deficiency
Shortness of breath, chronic cough which is worse on exertion,
scanty phlegm that is difficult to expectorate or dilute watery
phlegm, spontaneous sweating, a feeling of cold, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, weak voice, tongue Pale and slightly
Swollen in the front, pulse Empty on the right Front position and
slightly Slippery.
Lung-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight shortness of breath, weak breathing, low, short breathing
sounds, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white
complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel 
 
Slight shortness of breath, rapid, short breaths, cough, a feeling of
tightness of the chest, palpitations, anxiety, epigastric and
abdominal fullness, painful periods, Firm pulse.
1561
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs 
Shortness of breath, rapid, short breaths, chronic, barking cough
with a yellow or blood-tinged sputum, asthma, a feeling of fullness
and distension of the chest and hypochondrium, headache,
dizziness, red face, thirst, bitter taste, bloodshot eyes, scanty dark
urine, constipation, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow
coating, Wiry pulse.
WHEEZING
Hearing and Smelling,
 
Chapter 53
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Wheezing, cough with expectoration of watery white sputum, a
feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of
oppression of the chest and epigastrium, dull-white complexion,
pale urine, Pale and Swollen tongue with wet white coating,
Slippery-Slow pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Noisy wheezing, feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a
feeling of heat, red face, greasy skin, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, sputum in the throat, expectoration of yellow sputum,
dizziness, nausea, Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Wheezing, chronic cough with expectoration of profuse, sticky
white sputum which is easy to expectorate, 
a feeling of oppression
of the chest, dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence, nausea,
sputum in the throat, muzziness of the head, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Slight wheezing, expectoration of watery white sputum,
breathlessness, rattling sound in the throat, cold limbs, worse on
1562
exercise, pale face, sweating, feeling of cold, tendency to catch
colds, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Phlegm
Slight wheezing, expectoration of scanty sputum, breathlessness, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, dry cough, weak voice, dry
throat with desire to sip water, hoarse voice, night sweating,
tiredness, tongue without coating in the front, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
Chronic wheezing, shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, pale
complexion, tendency to catch colds, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, sputum in the throat, Pale and Swollen tongue, Soggy pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
Slight, chronic wheezing, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale and Swollen tongue,
Soggy pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Chronic wheezing, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
PAIN
Chest Pain
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 38
Heart-Blood stasis
Stabbing or pricking chest pain which may radiate to the inner
aspect of the left arm or to the shoulder, palpitations, a feeling of
1563
oppression or constriction of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails,
cold hands, tongue entirely Purple or Purple only on the sides in
the chest areas, Choppy or Wiry pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
A feeling of discomfort or very slight pain of the chest,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, tiredness, slight
depression, spontaneous sweating, a feeling of cold, cold hands,
bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Dull chest pain, a feeling of oppression or tightness of the chest,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, tiredness, slight
depression, spontaneous sweating, a feeling of cold, cold hands,
bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale and Swollen tongue, Deep-
Weak-Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Chest pain, a feeling of oppression of the chest, shortness of
breath, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling
of heat, red face, greasy skin, sputum in the throat, expectoration
of yellow sputum, dizziness, nausea, Red and Swollen tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Dull chest and hypochondrial distension and pain, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
Wiry pulse.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel 
Dull chest pain, a feeling of tightness of the chest, palpitations,
anxiety, a feeling of a lump in the throat, abdominal and umbilical
fullness, epigastric fullness, irregular periods, painful periods, a
feeling of energy rising in the abdomen to the chest, a feeling of
heat in the face, nausea, Firm pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
1564
Slight chest pain, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, a feeling of oppression or distension of the chest,
slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very
slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder channels
Chest pain extending to the hypochondrium, a feeling of
oppression and heaviness of the chest, bitter taste, poor appetite,
nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on
urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red
tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Pain In The Ribs
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
‘Pain in the ribs’ refers to pain on the lateral aspect of the rib
cage above the hypochondrial area.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Pain in the ribs with a feeling of distension, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe pain in the ribs, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain,
painful periods, irregular periods, dark and clotted menstrual
blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or
dark complexion, dry skin, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Pain in the ribs, a feeling of oppression and heaviness in the ribs,
bitter and sticky taste, burning on urination, excessive vaginal
discharge, irritability, a feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea,
vomiting, dark urine, tongue with Red sides and sticky yellow
1565
tongue coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
FEELINGS IN THE CHEST AND HEART
Feeling Of Oppression Of The Chest
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
Please note that this particular feeling is sometimes described as
a ‘feeling of tightness’ of the chest by many patients.
Phlegm in the Lungs
A feeling of oppression of the chest, breathlessness, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of heaviness, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Cold-
Phlegm, Damp-Phlegm or Phlegm-Heat.
Lung-Qi stagnation
A feeling of oppression of the chest, slight chest pain, a feeling of
tightness of the chest, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, irritability,
depression, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas,
pulse very slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Liver-Qi stagnation
A feeling of oppression and distension of the chest and
hypochondrium, epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel 
A feeling of oppression of the chest, dull chest pain, a feeling of
tightness of the chest, a feeling of heat in the face, a feeling of a
lump in the throat, palpitations, anxiety, nausea, slight
breathlessness, epigastric fullness or stuffiness, umbilical and
abdominal fullness, irregular/painful periods, a feeling of energy
rising in the abdomen to the chest, Firm pulse.
1566
Heart-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
A feeling of oppression or tightness of the chest, slight chest pain
or discomfort, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion,
tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous sweating, a feeling of
cold, cold hands, bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
‘A feeling of oppression of the chest’ is the translation
of the Chinese term ‘
men
 
’, which nearly always
indicates that emotional problems are at the root of this
symptom. P-6 Neiguan and ST-40 Fenglong used
unilaterally and crossed over is a good combination for
this symptom.
Feeling Of Distension Of The Chest
Liver-Qi stagnation
Feeling of distension of the chest and hypochondrium, epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Feeling of distension, oppression or tightness of the chest, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, slight
breathlessness, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very slightly
Tight on the right Front position.
Feeling Of Heat Of The Chest
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 38
Lung-Heat
A feeling of heat of the chest, cough, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red
1567
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat in the chest in the afternoon or evening, dry
cough or with scanty, sticky sputum, dry mouth and throat at
night, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a feeling of heat or a
low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin body, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
A feeling of heat of the chest, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
A feeling of heat of the chest that is worse in the evening,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, mental restlessness, dry mouth and throat, malar flush,
night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip and
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Residual Heat in the diaphragm
A feeling of heat in the chest, thirst, dry throat, irritability,
restlessness, a feeling of fullness and stuffiness of the diaphragm
and epigastrium, which feels soft on pressure, nausea, slight
shortness of breath, tongue Red in the front, Deep-Rapid pulse.
This is residual Heat following an invasion of Wind-Heat, which
later progressed to the Qi level.
Heart Feeling Vexed
The term ‘Heart feeling vexed’ (called 
Xin Zhong Ao Nong
 
)
includes a feeling of anxiety and mental restlessness with heat, a
slight feeling of oppression and uneasiness of the chest and a
feeling of constriction between the heart and the diaphragm.
1568
Heart-Fire
Heart feeling vexed, a feeling of tightness of the chest,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Heart feeling vexed, a slight feeling of emptiness of the chest,
anxiety, mental restlessness, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, dry mouth and throat, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat,
Red tongue with redder tip and without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Qi and Yin deficiency of the Heart
Heart feeling vexed, a slight feeling of tightness of the chest, slight
anxiety, palpitations, sweating, slight shortness of breath, dry
throat, dry mouth, insomnia, tongue without coating, Weak pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Heart
Heart feeling vexed, palpitations, mental restlessness, thirst, red
face, a feeling of oppression of the chest, expectoration of phlegm,
sputum in the throat, bitter taste, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, a feeling of agitation, mental confusion, incoherent speech,
rash behaviour, uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting,
depression, manic behaviour, Red tongue with redder swollen tip,
and Heart crack with a sticky, dry yellow coating inside it, Slippery-
Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Residual Heat in the diaphragm
Heart feeling vexed, a feeling of heat in the chest, thirst, dry throat,
irritability, restlessness, a feeling of fullness and stuffiness of the
diaphragm and epigastrium, which feels soft on pressure, nausea,
slight shortness of breath, tongue Red in the front, Deep-Rapid
pulse.
This is residual Heat following an invasion of Wind-Heat, which
1569
later progressed to the Qi level.
Feeling Of Stuffiness Under The Heart
‘A feeling of stuffiness’ indicates a subjective feeling of fullness or
oppression of a certain area of the body, which, however, feels soft
on palpation. It is a translation of the Chinese term 
pi
 
.
Heat
A feeling of stuffiness under the heart, a feeling of heat,
palpitations, thirst, nausea, dark urine, Red tongue with yellow
tongue coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Heart or Lungs.
Cold
A feeling of stuffiness under the heart, a feeling of cold, cold
limbs, white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Lungs or Stomach.
Phlegm
A feeling of stuffiness under the heart, sputum in the throat, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea, vomiting, dizziness,
blurred vision, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Lungs, Heart or Stomach, and on the type of Phlegm.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel 
A feeling of stuffiness under the heart, palpitations under the
heart, feeling of heat in the face, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
anxiety, a feeling of tightness of the chest, nausea, slight
breathlessness, epigastric fullness or stuffiness, umbilical and
abdominal fullness, irregular/painful periods, a feeling of energy
rising in the abdomen to the chest, Firm pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids 
1570
A feeling of stuffiness under the heart, abdominal fullness and
distension, nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a
desire to drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of
thin watery sputum, inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
PALPITATIONS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
‘Palpitations’ indicates a subjective sensation of the patient who
is aware of the heart beating and may have the impression that it is
fast or irregular. This is a subjective sensation and the pulse may
in fact be neither rapid nor irregular. ‘Palpitations’ should
therefore not be confused or identified with the Western symptom
of tachycardia, which refers to the objective rapidity of the pulse,
nor to arrhythmia.
Palpitations is a symptom that may appear in any Heart pattern
(to avoid repetition, please refer to the Heart patterns in 
Chapter
91
 
). Below are listed three more conditions that may cause
palpitations.
Shock affecting the Heart
Palpitations after a shock, anxiety, agitation, restless sleep, Moving
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing to the
Heart 
Palpitations, oedema especially of the legs and ankles, a feeling of
cold generally or in legs and back, fullness and distension of
abdomen, soreness of the lower back, scanty clear urination,
breathlessness, cold hands, Pale and Swollen tongue with a wet
white coating, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Rebellious-Qi in the Penetrating Vessel affecting the
Heart 
Severe palpitations, anxiety, feeling of energy rising from the
1571
abdomen to the chest, a feeling of heat in the face, a feeling of a
lump in the throat, a feeling of tightness of the chest, nausea,
slight breathlessness, epigastric fullness or stuffiness, umbilical
and abdominal fullness, irregular/painful periods, Firm pulse.
Palpitations Under The Heart
‘Palpitations under the heart’ indicates a feeling of pulsation in the
epigastrium or the area between the heart and epigastrium.
Western patients may express this symptom in different ways,
such as ‘a feeling of pulsation in the stomach’, ‘butterflies in the
stomach’, ‘a jumping feeling in the stomach’ and ‘a feeling of
anxiety in the stomach’.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Slight palpitations under the heart, a desire to press or massage
the area between the heart and the stomach, shortness of breath
on exertion, tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous sweating, a
slight feeling of discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a
feeling of cold, cold hands, bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight palpitations under the heart, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, mental restlessness, dry mouth and
throat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night
sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip and without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Severe palpitations under the heart, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, mental restlessness, thirst, red face, dark urine,
expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of agitation, mental
confusion, incoherent speech, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or
scold people, uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting, muttering
to oneself, depression, manic behaviour, Red tongue with redder
1572
swollen tip, Heart crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it,
Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel 
Palpitations under the heart, a feeling of heat in the face, a feeling
of a lump in the throat, anxiety, a feeling of tightness of the chest,
nausea, slight breathlessness, epigastric fullness or stuffiness,
umbilical and abdominal fullness, irregular/painful periods, a
feeling of energy rising in the abdomen to the chest, Firm pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing to the
Heart 
Slight palpitations under the heart, oedema especially of the legs
and ankles, a feeling of cold in the legs and back, fullness and
distension of the abdomen, soreness of the lower back, a feeling of
cold, scanty clear urination, palpitations, breathlessness, cold
hands, Pale and Swollen tongue with a wet white coating, Deep-
Weak-Slow pulse.
DISPLACED HEARTBEAT
Heartbeat Displaced Downwards
Observation,
 
Chapter 13
Heart-Qi deficiency with Heart-Blood stasis
Heartbeat displaced downwards, exhaustion, palpitations,
shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight
depression, spontaneous sweating, chest pain, purple lips, Bluish-
Purple tongue, Choppy pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Heartbeat displaced downwards, palpitations, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of limbs, dry eyes, blurred
vision, dry throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night
sweating, dry stools, nocturnal emissions, scanty menstruation or
1573
amenorrhoea, delayed cycle, infertility, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids obstructing the Heart
Heartbeat displaced downwards, palpitations, abdominal fullness
and distension, nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth
without a desire to drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of
thin watery sputum, inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat invading the Heart
Heartbeat displaced downwards, palpitations, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, breathlessness, mental restlessness, fever,
Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heartbeat Displaced Upwards
Observation,
 
Chapter 13
Kidney and Heart-Yang deficiency with Water
overflowing 
Heartbeat displaced upwards, oedema especially of the legs and
ankles, a feeling of cold generally or in legs and back, fullness and
distension of the abdomen, soreness of the lower back, scanty
clear urination, palpitations, breathlessness, cold hands, Pale and
Swollen 
tongue with a wet white coating, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Heartbeat Displaced To The Left
Observation,
 
Chapter 13
Phlegm-Fluids in the chest and hypochondrium
Heartbeat displaced to the left, hypochondrial pain which is worse
on coughing and breathing, a feeling of distension and pulling of
the hypochondrium, shortness of breath, cough with expectoration
1574
of watery white sputum, breathlessness, oedema, dizziness,
hypochondrial pain, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-
Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis with Water overflowing
Heartbeat displaced to the left, hypochondrial pain, abdominal
pain, painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in
the abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion,
oedema of the abdomen, Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry or Firm
pulse.
Heartbeat Displaced To The Right
Observation,
 
Chapter 13
Heart-Qi deficiency with Heart-Blood stasis
Heartbeat displaced to the right, exhaustion, palpitations,
shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, spontaneous sweating,
stabbing or pricking chest pain which may radiate to the inner
aspect of the left arm or to the shoulder, a feeling of oppression or
constriction of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands,
tongue entirely Purple or Purple only on the sides in the chest
areas, Choppy pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the chest and hypochondrium
Heartbeat displaced to the right, hypochondrial pain which is
worse on coughing and breathing, a feeling of distension and
pulling of the hypochondrium, shortness of breath, cough with
expectoration of watery white sputum, breathlessness, oedema,
dizziness, hypochondrial pain, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Deep-Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Heartbeat Below The Xyphoid Process
Observation,
 
Chapter 13
Heart-Blood stasis
1575
Heartbeat below the xyphoid process, palpitations, stabbing or
pricking chest pain which may radiate to the inner aspect of the
left arm or to the shoulder, a feeling of oppression or constriction
of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands, tongue entirely
Purple or Purple only on the sides in the chest areas, Choppy or
Wiry pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency
Heartbeat below the xyphoid process, palpitations, shortness of
breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight depression,
spontaneous sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
ABNORMAL CHEST SHAPE
Protruding Chest
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
Chronic Phlegm in the Lungs
Protruding chest, a feeling of oppression of the chest, cough with
expectoration of profuse sputum, breathlessness, sputum in the
throat, wheezing, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Severe Liver-Qi stagnation
Protruding chest, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Protruding chest, chest pain, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the
abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Sunken Chest
1576
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
Lung-Qi deficiency
Sunken chest, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white
complexion, tendency to catch 
colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Sunken chest, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with desire to sip
water, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue without
coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Sunken chest, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Sunken chest, dry cough which is worse in the evening, dry throat
and mouth, thin body, breathlessness on exertion, lower backache,
night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty
urination, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Protruding Sternum
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
Constitutional deficiency of Lungs and Kidneys
Protruding sternum, poor constitution, tendency to catch colds,
lower backache, a history of repeated chest infections during
childhood.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Yin or
Yang deficiency.
1577
Phlegm in the Lungs
Protruding sternum, a feeling of oppression of the chest, cough
with expectoration of profuse sputum, sputum in the throat,
breathlessness, wheezing, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Chest Sunken On One Side
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
Lung-Yin deficiency
Chest sunken on one side, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with
desire to sip water, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs 
Chest sunken on one side, abdominal fullness and distension,
nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a desire to
drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of thin watery sputum,
inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-
Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs with Blood stasis
Chest sunken on one side, abdominal fullness and distension,
nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a desire to
drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of thin watery sputum,
inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, purple
lips, chest pain, Purple and Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery or Wiry pulse.
Chest Protruding On One Side
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs 
1578
Chest protruding on one side, abdominal fullness and distension,
nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a desire to
drink, shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, swelling of the limbs, expectoration of thin watery sputum,
inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-
Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
Severe Liver-Qi stagnation
Chest protruding on one side, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency with Blood stasis
Chest protruding on one side, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, pale face, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, chest pain,
purple lips, cold hands, tongue Purple on the sides towards the
front, Choppy pulse.
GYNAECOMASTIA
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Gynaecomastia is a swelling of the breasts in males.
Liver-Blood stasis
Gynaecomastia, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, vomiting of
blood, epistaxis, infertility, masses in the abdomen, purple nails
and lips, purple or dark complexion, dry skin (only in severe
cases), purple petechiae, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Penetrating Vessel
Gynaecomastia, abdominal fullness and pain, pain in the testicles,
turbid urine, tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
YAWNING
1579
Yawning is considered a symptom only if it occurs very frequently;
yawning when one is sleepy and tired is normal.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Frequent yawning, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Frequent yawning, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, a feeling of oppression or distension of the chest,
slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very
slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Frequent yawning, a feeling of tightness of the chest, chest pain,
abdominal distension, palpitations, agitation, Purple tongue, Wiry
pulse.
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Frequent yawning, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
SIGHING
Liver-Qi stagnation
Bouts of sighing preceded by emotional problems, long sighs,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
1580
Short sighs, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, a feeling of oppression or distension of the chest,
slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very
slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Spleen and Heart-Qi deficiency
Short sighs, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, spontaneous
sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1581
CHAPTER 64
 
LIMBS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
PAIN IN THE LIMBS
HANDS AND FEET
Cold hands and feet
Hot hands and feet
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE LIMBS
Numbness/tingling of the limbs
Feeling of heaviness of the limbs
Feeling of distension of the limbs
WEAKNESS AND ATROPHY
Weakness of the limbs
Atrophy of the limbs
Flaccidity of the limbs
LIMB SWELLING
Oedema of the limbs
Swelling of the joints of the limbs
LIMB MOVEMENT
1582
Rigidity of the limbs
Paralysis of the limbs
Contraction of the limbs
Tremor or spasticity of the limbs
Convulsions of the limbs
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Dampness in the muscles
Muscle ache, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, a feeling of
heaviness in general, lassitude, sleepiness, epigastric fullness,
sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether the Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat.
Phlegm-Heat in the muscles
Muscle ache, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, thirst without a desire to drink, Swollen
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Distending muscle ache, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Dull muscle ache which is aggravated by physical exertion,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
1583
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Dampness is by far the most common cause of
muscle ache. This is a common symptom in postviral
fatigue syndrome.
PAIN IN THE LIMBS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Wind
Wandering pain in the joints that may come and go, especially in
the upper part of the body.
This pattern is Wind Painful Obstruction Syndrome and, in
acute cases, the pulse is Floating.
Cold
Pain in the joints that is aggravated by exposure to cold and
alleviated by application of heat, usually in one joint only, cold
limbs.
This is Cold Painful Obstruction Syndrome and, in acute cases,
the pulse is Tight.
Dampness
Pain in the joints with swelling, a feeling of heaviness, numbness
of the limbs.
This is Damp Painful Obstruction Syndrome and, in acute cases,
the pulse is Slippery.
Damp-Heat
Pain in the joints with swelling and redness, hot to touch, a feeling
of heaviness and numbness of the limbs, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency 
1584
Chronic, dull ache in the joints that is aggravated when tired and
alleviated by rest, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Liver and Kidney deficiency
Dull ache in the joints especially in the lower part of the body,
weak knees, dizziness, lower backache, tinnitus.
Other clinical manifestations, including tongue and pulse,
depend on whether there is Yin or Yang deficiency.
HANDS AND FEET
Cold Hands And Feet
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Yang deficiency
Coldness of hands and feet, the cold feeling extending to arms and
legs, feeling of cold in general, bright-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
These are the symptoms of a general Yang deficiency and other
manifestations depend on the organ involved, which may be the
Heart, Lungs, Spleen or Kidneys.
Blood deficiency 
Coldness of hands and feet, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
blurred vision, dizziness, insomnia, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
This pattern is much more common in women and it may be due
to either Liver-Blood or Heart-Blood deficiency.
Qi stagnation
Coldness of hands and feet, especially of the fingers and toes,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
1585
Phlegm
Coldness of hands and feet, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Heat stagnating in the Interior (True Heat-False Cold)
Coldness of hands and feet, dark face, bright eyes with lustre, dry
red lips, irritability, strong body, breathing noisy, loud voice, thirst
with a desire to drink cold fluids, scanty dark urine, constipation, a
burning sensation in the anus, coldness of the limbs, hot chest, a
feeling of heat of the face, red face, mental restlessness, thirst, Red
tongue, Rapid pulse.
This pattern is quite rare and the cold hands and feet are due to
Heat stagnating in the Interior and preventing Qi from reaching
the extremities.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Cold hands and feet are a reliable indication of Yang
deficiency or Cold. In women, do not be surprised if this
symptom is accompanied by a feeling of heat of the face.
Hot Hands And Feet
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Damp-Heat
Heat in hands and feet, sweating of hands and feet, swollen, red
and hot joints of the hands and feet, a 
feeling of heaviness and
numbness of the limbs, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Heat in hands and feet, or in palms and soles, palpitations, mental
restlessness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, anxiety, poor
memory, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache,
a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat,
1586
scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue with redder tip and a
Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Heat in hands and feet, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Heat in hands and feet worse in the afternoon, dull or burning
epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry stools, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire
to drink in small sips, a feeling of hunger but no desire to eat,
night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue
without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE LIMBS
Numbness/Tingling Of The Limbs
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Tingling and weakness of the limbs, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Phlegm in the limbs
Numbness of the limbs, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
tendency to obesity, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Numbness of the limbs, especially the upper limbs and often
unilateral, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, tremor, dizziness,
headache, Swollen and Stiff tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
1587
Numbness of the limbs, especially the upper limbs and often
unilateral, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Dampness
Numbness of the limbs, especially the legs, pain in the joints with
swelling, muscle ache, a feeling of heaviness, sticky tongue
coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
Numbness of the limbs, especially the lower limbs, ache, redness,
heat and swelling of the joints, muscle ache, Red tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
Numbness/tingling of the limbs, stiffness and pain of the limbs,
dark complexion, Purple tongue.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Numbness/tingling of the limbs, aversion to cold, fever, occipital
headache, stiff neck, sneezing, body aches, tongue with thin white
coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Numbness is more indicative of Phlegm or Wind,
whereas tingling is more indicative of a deficiency of
Blood.
Feeling Of Heaviness Of The Limbs
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Dampness
A feeling of heaviness of the limbs, especially the legs, numbness,
swelling of the legs, a feeling of heaviness in general, epigastric
1588
fullness, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
A feeling of heaviness of the limbs, especially the legs, swelling of
the legs, hot feet, muscle ache, numbness, epigastric fullness,
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
A slight feeling of heaviness of the limbs, especially of the legs,
weakness of the limbs, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, 
pale complexion, loose stools,
abdominal fullness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested food
in the stools, nausea, dull frontal headache, Pale tongue with sticky
coating, Soggy pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Dampness
A slight feeling of heaviness of the limbs, especially the legs, weak
and cold knees, lower backache, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, excessive vaginal
discharge, Pale and wet tongue with a sticky coating, Deep-Weak
and slightly Slippery pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
A slight feeling of heaviness of the limbs, weakness of the limbs,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools, abdominal fullness, sticky
taste, uncomfortable sensation in the epigastrium, Pale tongue
with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Phlegm in the limbs
A feeling of heaviness of the limbs, numbness of the limbs,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen
tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
A feeling of heaviness of the limbs is a very reliable
1589
symptom of Dampness in the lower part of the body.
Feeling Of Distension Of The Limbs
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Qi stagnation with Dampness
A feeling of distension or heaviness of the limbs, swelling of the
skin, sticky tongue coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Blood stasis from Qi deficiency
A feeling of distension of the limbs, aggravated by overexertion,
pain in the limbs, purple colour of the lower legs, tiredness, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, shortness of breath, Wiry or
Choppy pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
A feeling of distension or heaviness of the limbs,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, severe dizziness, blurred vision,
tremors, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
WEAKNESS AND ATROPHY
Weakness Of The Limbs
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Weakness of the four limbs, especially of the legs, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, no appetite, lack of
sense of taste, loose stools, tiredness especially in the morning,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1590
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Weakness of all limbs, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weakness of the limbs, especially the legs, weak knees, lower
backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Atrophy Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles of the four limbs, weakness of
the limbs, muscular weakness, gait like a duck, feet turning in or
out, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
In children this corresponds to the sequelae stage of
poliomyelitis.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles, especially of the legs, weak
knees, staggering gait, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat,
dry hair and 
skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This pattern is more common in the elderly.
1591
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles, muscular weakness, cold
limbs, cold knees, weak legs, feeling of cold generally or in the
back, oedema of the lower legs, lower backache, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at night, loose
stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, early-morning
diarrhoea, chronic diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles, late development in children,
hands unable to grasp, inability to put feet down, slow mental
development.
This pattern occurs only in children or babies and is often
associated with the Five Retardations (slow development in
children involving standing, walking, teeth development, hair
development and speech) and the Five Flaccidities (late closure of
the fontanelles, flaccidity of mouth, hands, feet and muscles).
Flaccidity Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Flaccidity of the four limbs, cold and weak limbs, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
1592
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Flaccidity of the four limbs, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Flaccidity of the four limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at
night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Qi deficiency with Blood stasis
Flaccidity of the four limbs in children, pain in the limbs especially
at night, listlessness, poor appetite, tendency to catch colds, weak
voice, shortness of breath, loose stools, Bluish-Purple tongue,
Weak or Choppy pulse.
Heat at the Nutritive-Qi level
Flaccidity of the four limbs with acute onset, fever at night, mental
confusion, delirium, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid
pulse.
LIMB SWELLING
Oedema Of The Limbs
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 18
 
and
 
19
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
;
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 65
 
, 
66
 
, 
68
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of the limbs and abdomen, feeling of cold
generally or in limbs, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, Pale and
1593
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of the ankles and legs, weak knees, lower
backache, a feeling of cold generally or in the knees, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Pitting oedema of the hands and face, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat
Swelling of the legs and ankles, aching, swelling, redness and heat
of the joints, hot limbs, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Qi stagnation
Non-pitting oedema of the limbs, with the skin springings back on
pressing the swollen area, a feeling of distension of the limbs.
Cold-Dampness
Swelling of the legs and ankles, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
cold limbs, ache in the joints, a feeling of cold, sticky white tongue
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis
Oedema of the limbs, cold hands and feet, numbness of the limbs,
muscular weakness, purple colour of hands or feet or both,
tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Choppy pulse.
1594
Wind-Water invading the Lungs
Sudden swelling of the eyes, face and hands gradually spreading
to the whole body, bright-shiny complexion, scanty and pale
urination, aversion to wind, fever, cough, slight breathlessness,
sticky white tongue coating, Floating-Slippery pulse.
This is an acute type of oedema and this pattern is a type of
external Wind-Cold.
Swelling Of The Joints Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Damp Painful Obstruction (Bi) Syndrome
Swelling and pain of the joints, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs
and the body.
In the case of Damp-Heat, in addition to the above symptoms,
the joints would be also red and hot to the touch.
Phlegm in the joints
Long-term, chronic swelling and deformities of joints, osteophytes,
a feeling of heaviness of the limbs and body, sputum in the throat,
a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse.
LIMB MOVEMENT
Rigidity Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Wind in the joints
Stiffness of the limbs, difficulty in extending the limbs, pain in the
joints.
This pattern corresponds to Wandering Painful Obstruction
Syndrome.
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
1595
Rigidity of the limbs, pain in the muscles and joints, inability to
bend arms, abdominal distension, irritability, Purple tongue, Wiry
pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Rigidity of the upper limbs, tense upper back muscles, headache,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
Wiry pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Rigidity of the lower limbs, thin limbs, weak knees,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry
hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Rigidity of the upper limbs, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Rigidity of the limbs, numbness or tingling of limbs, severe
dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Paralysis Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Paralysis of the four limbs, weak and cold limbs, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, 
tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the
1596
epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Paralysis of the four limbs, weak limbs, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Paralysis of the four limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle
nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind
Tremor or spasms of limbs, weak limbs, weak knees,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry
hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured Deviated or
Moving tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and slightly Wiry
pulse.
Retention of Dampness in the muscles
Paralysis of the four limbs, a feeling of heaviness of the body on
limbs, swelling of the limbs and joints, epigastric fullness, sticky
taste, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Paralysis of the four limbs, pain in the limbs which may be worse
at night, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and
clotted menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and
lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm
1597
pulse.
Wind and Phlegm in the channels
Hemiplegia, numbness/tingling of the limbs (usually unilateral),
sputum in the throat, feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen
and Deviated tongue, Slippery and Wiry pulse.
This corresponds to the sequelae stage of Wind-stroke.
Contraction Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Contraction and numbness of the limbs, weak muscles, tingling of
the limbs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Contraction of the lower limbs, thin limbs, weak knees, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or
vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry
eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin,
brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Contraction and swelling of the limbs, a feeling of cold generally
or in the limbs, ache in the joints, a feeling of heaviness of the
limbs, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Internal Wind 
Contraction of the upper limbs, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
1598
Contraction of the upper limbs, aversion to cold, fever, cough,
itchy throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose with clear
watery discharge, sneezing, occipital headache, body aches, thin
white tongue coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Phlegm
Contraction of the limbs, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Blood stasis
Contraction of the limbs, pain of the limbs, hypochondrial pain,
abdominal pain, painful periods, dark complexion, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Tremor Or Spasticity Of The Limbs
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 4
 
and 
18
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
;
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 66
Liver-Wind
Pronounced tremor of the limbs, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Tremor of the limbs, severe dizziness, blurred vision,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and
Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood or -Yin deficiency leading to Empty-Wind 
Mild tremor of the limbs, slight tremor of the head or hand or
both, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision, numbness/tingling of a
limb, dry eyes.
The tongue and pulse presentation depends on whether there is
1599
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency.
Heat generating Wind
Tremor of the limbs, convulsions, twitching of limbs, high fever,
fainting, rigidity of neck, opisthotonos, macular rash, eyeballs
turning up, clenching of teeth, Dark-Red tongue without coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
This is an acute pattern occurring during a febrile disease and it
corresponds to the Blood level within the identification of patterns
according to the Four Levels.
Convulsions Of The Limbs
Observation,
 
Chapter 18
Liver-Yang rising generating Liver-Wind
Convulsions of the four limbs, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency generating Liver-Wind
Slight convulsions or twitching of the four limbs,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
facial tics, dull-pale complexion, Pale and Stiff tongue, Choppy or
Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind and Phlegm
Convulsions of the four limbs, facial tic, tremors,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, severe dizziness, blurred vision,
tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency and Liver-Blood
deficiency giving rise to Liver-Wind
Slight convulsions of the four limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, weak
knees, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or
1600
vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry
eyes, blurred vision, floaters, dry throat in the evening, dry hair
and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion with red
cheekbones, normal-coloured or Pale tongue without coating,
Choppy, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
This pattern usually occurs during pregnancy or after childbirth.
Heat victorious stirring Wind (Blood level)
Convulsions of the four limbs with acute onset, tremor or
twitching of the limbs, high fever, fainting, neck rigidity,
opisthotonos, macular rash, turning up of the eyeballs, clenching
of the teeth, Dark-Red tongue without coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency generating Empty-Wind (Blood level)
Slight convulsions or twitching of the four limbs with acute onset,
low-grade fever, tremor of the limbs, loss of weight, malar flush,
listlessness, Dark-Red tongue without coating and Dry, Fine-Rapid
pulse.
1601
CHAPTER 65
 
ARMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
PAIN IN THE ELBOW
HANDS
Cold hands
Hot hands
Pale hands
Red dorsum of the hands
Red palms
Sweaty palms
Pain in the hands
Itchy hands
Numbness/tingling of the hands
Tremor of the hands
Oedema of the hands
Deformed knuckles
Tinea (ringworm)
Dry, cracked and peeling palms
1602
Venules on the thenar eminence
Atrophy of the thenar eminence
Atrophy of the muscles of the dorsum of the
hands
FINGERS
Swollen fingers
Contraction of the fingers
Spoon-shaped fingers
Thin, pointed fingers
Cracked fingers
Thickened fingers
Shrivelled and wrinkled fingers
NAILS
Ridged nails
Thickening of the nails
Coarse and thick nails
Cracked nails
Nails falling off
Indented nails
Thin and brittle nails
Withered and brittle nails
Withered and thickened nails
Curling nails
Flaking nails
Twisted nails
Nails with white spots
1603
Pale-white nails
Dull-white nails
Red nails
Yellow nails
Bluish-greenish nails
Dark nails
Purple nails
Small or absent lunulae
Large lunulae
PAIN IN THE ELBOW
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Invasion of Cold
Unilateral, severe pain in the elbow that is aggravated by exposure
to cold and alleviated by the application of heat.
Invasion of Cold-Dampness
Unilateral pain in the elbow that is aggravated by exposure to cold
and dampness and alleviated by the application of heat, swelling
of the joint, a feeling of heaviness and numbness of the affected
arm.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Unilateral pain in the elbow that is aggravated by rest and slightly
ameliorated by movement. This is usually due to repetitive strain
injury.
Damp-Heat
Pain in the elbow with swelling, redness and heat of the joint, a
1604
feeling of heaviness and numbness of the affected arm.
HANDS
Cold Hands
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Heart-Yang deficiency
Cold hands, sweaty hands, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of
discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of cold,
bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency
Cold hands, sweaty hands, slight shortness of breath, slight cough
with profuse watery sputum, weak voice, spontaneous daytime
sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency
to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold generally
or of the upper back, absence of thirst, Pale and slightly wet
tongue, Weak pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Cold hands, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Cold hands and often cold feet, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold, oedema, Pale
and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Cold hands, especially fingers, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
1605
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm in the channels
Cold hands, numbness or tingling of the limbs, a feeling of
heaviness, or of oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Cold hands are a reliable symptom of Yang deficiency.
Hot Hands
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Heart-Fire
Hot hands, especially the dorsum, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Heat
Hot hands, especially the dorsum, cough, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Hot hands, especially the dorsum, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Hot palms, five-palm heat, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
1606
bothered’, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids,
a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, Red
tongue with redder tip and no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Hot palms, five-palm heat, dry cough or with scanty, sticky sputum
which could be blood tinged, dry mouth and throat at night,
weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a feeling
of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, thin body or chest,
insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Hot palms, five-palm heat, dull or burning epigastric pain, a
feeling of heat in the afternoon, constipation (dry stools), dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire
to drink in small sips, a feeling of hunger but no desire to eat, a
slight feeling of fullness after eating, night sweating, five-palm
heat, 
bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach Damp-Heat
Hot hands (dorsum), swelling and redness of the joints, pain in the
hands, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium, a feeling
of heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or thick sticky nasal
discharge, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, a feeling of
heat, dull-yellow complexion, a sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Dorsum of the hands hot to touch, aversion to cold, chills, fever,
stiff neck, occipital headache, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
1607
Pale Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Heart-Yang deficiency
Pale hands, cold hands, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of
discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of cold,
bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency
Pale hands, cold hands, slight shortness of breath, slight cough
with profuse watery sputum, weak voice, spontaneous daytime
sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency
to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold generally
or of the upper back, absence of thirst, Pale and slightly wet
tongue, Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Pale hands, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling
of the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Pale hands, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Red Dorsum Of The Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Full-Heat
Red dorsum of the hands, hot hands, a feeling of heat, thirst, red
face.
Other symptoms and signs depend on which organ is involved,
1608
which may be the Heart, Lungs or Stomach.
Red Palms
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Empty-Heat
Red palms of the hands, hot hands, becoming hotter in the
afternoon and evening, a feeling of heat in the afternoon or
evening, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips.
Other symptoms and signs depend on which organ is involved,
which may be the Heart, Lungs or Stomach.
Sweaty Palms
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Lung-Qi deficiency
Sweaty palms, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white
complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency
Sweaty palms, pale hands, cold hands, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough with profuse watery sputum, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold
generally or of the upper back, absence of thirst, Pale and slightly
wet tongue, Weak pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Sweaty palms which are worse in the afternoon, hot palms, cough
which is dry or with scanty sticky sputum, weak/hoarse voice, dry
mouth and throat, tickly throat, tiredness, dislike of speaking, thin
body or thin chest, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue
without coating (or with rootless coating) in the front part,
1609
Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency
Sweaty palms when nervous, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous
sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Sweaty palms with cold sweat when nervous, cold hands,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, tiredness,
spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of discomfort or stuffiness
in the heart region, a feeling of cold, bright-pale face, slightly dark
lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Sweaty palms which are worse in the evening or when nervous,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness,
uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth and throat,
night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or with
rootless coating, Floating-Empty pulse, especially on the left Front
position.
Lung-Heat
Sweaty palms, hot hands, cough, slight breathless-ness, a feeling
of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Sweaty palms and hot hands, especially when anxious,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Pain In The Hands
1610
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Wind
Wandering pain in the hands, fingers and other joints.
Cold
Pain in the hands that is aggravated by exposure to cold and
alleviated by application of heat, contraction of fingers, a feeling of
cold, cold hands.
Dampness
Ache and swelling of the hand or fingers or both, numbness of the
hands.
Damp-Heat in the channels
Pain, swelling and redness of the hands, numbness/tingling of the
hands, a feeling of heaviness of the arms, muscle ache.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Pain in the hands (often in feet as well), hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Pain in the hands that is worse at night, rigidity of the fingers,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, abdominal
pain, chest pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood deficiency 
Dull ache of the hands, cold hands, dizziness, blurred vision,
scanty periods, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ affected, which
may be Heart, Liver or Spleen. This pattern is more common in
women.
1611
Heart-Yang deficiency
Dull ache in the hands, cold hands, palpitations, shortness of
breath on exertion, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, a slight
feeling of discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of
cold, bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency
Dull ache in the hands, cold hands, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough with profuse watery sputum, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold
generally or of the upper back, absence of thirst, Pale and slightly
wet tongue, Weak pulse.
Stomach-Yang deficiency
Dull ache in the hands, cold hands (and often feet), discomfort or
dull pain in the epigastrium, better after 
eating and with pressure
or massage, no appetite, preference for warm drinks and foods,
vomiting of clear fluid, absence of thirst, cold and weak limbs,
tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Dull ache in the hands that is worse in the evening, hot palms,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, a tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness,
uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth and throat,
night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or with
rootless coating, Floating-Empty pulse, especially on the left Front
position.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Dull ache in the hands that is worse in the evening, hot palms, dry
cough, weak voice, dry throat with a desire to sip water, hoarse
voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue without coating in the
front, Floating-Empty pulse.
1612
Itchy Hands
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Dampness
Itchy hands, swollen fingers with small white vesicles, fungal
infections, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
Itchy hands, swollen and red fingers, small yellow vesicles, fungal
infections, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Itchy hands with acute onset, itching spreading up the arms and
towards the face, red rash on hands.
Blood deficiency leading to Wind in the skin
Itchy hands, pale and cold hands, tingling of the hands, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Numbness/Tingling Of The Hands
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 39
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Numbness/tingling of the hands and limbs, more tingling than
numbness, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness or
tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Phlegm
Numbness/tingling of the hands and limbs, more numbness than
tingling, dizziness, feeling of heavi-ness of the body, sputum in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue,
Slippery pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
1613
Unilateral numbness of a hand and especially the first three
fingers, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, tinnitus, nausea,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or
Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Unilateral numbness of a hand and especially the first three
fingers, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache, numbness
of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Dampness
Numbness/tingling of the hands, swelling of the fingers, muscle
ache, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, sticky tongue coating,
Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
Numbness/tingling of the hands, hot and swollen fingers, redness
of the hands and fingers, ache in the wrist, muscle ache, a feeling
of heaviness of the limbs, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Numbness/tingling of the hands, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, abdominal pain, chest pain, painful periods,
dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Invasion of external Wind
Numbness/tingling of the hands with acute onset, aversion to cold,
fever, stiff neck, occipital headache, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Cold
or Wind-Heat.
Tremor Of The Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
1614
Liver-Wind
Tremor of the hands, unilateral numbness/tingling of a hand,
severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Wind with Phlegm 
Tremor of the hands, swollen hands, unilateral numbness/tingling
of a hand, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tinnitus, nausea,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or
Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency leading to Wind 
Mild tremor of the hands, numbness/tingling of the hands or
limbs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion, dry eyes, night sweating, Pale or normal-
coloured tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heat generating Wind
Tremor of hands, convulsions, twitching of limbs, high fever,
fainting, rigidity of neck, opisthotonos, macular rash, eyeballs
turning up, clenching of teeth, Dark-Red tongue without coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Oedema Of The Hands
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 18
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms
and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 64
 
, 
68
Lung-Yang deficiency
Oedema of the hands with slight pitting, cold hands, slight
shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, a feeling of cold, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of the hands, cold limbs, weakness of the limbs,
1615
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools, a feeling of cold, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Non-pitting oedema of the hands, cold fingers and toes,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Deformed Knuckles
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Chronic Painful Obstruction Syndrome with Phlegm
Deformed knuckles, pain in the fingers, numbness/tingling of the
hands. If Phlegm is combined with Heat, the fingers will be red
and hot to the touch.
Chronic Painful Obstruction Syndrome with Phlegm
and Blood stasis
Deformed knuckles, severe pain in the fingers, dark complexion,
rigidity of the finger joints.
Chronic Painful Obstruction Syndrome with Phlegm
and Qi/Yin deficiency
Deformed knuckles, dull ache in the fingers, shiny skin, atrophy of
muscles of the dorsum of the hand, tiredness, loose stools, poor
appetite, dry skin, night sweating.
The pulse and tongue depend on whether deficiency of Qi or Yin
predominates.
Tinea (Ringworm)
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
External invasion of Wind-Heat
Tinea of the hands, dry skin, itchy skin.
1616
External invasion of Damp-Heat
Tinea of the hands, itchy skin, swollen hands, vesicles.
Toxic Heat in the skin
Tinea of the hands, intensely red rash with red papules that
spreads quickly, unbearable itching, Red tongue with red points
and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Dry, Cracked And Peeling Palms
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Blood deficiency 
Dry, cracked and peeling palms, dry and brittle nails, dry skin,
dizziness, tiredness, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Liver-
Blood or Heart-Blood deficiency.
Blood deficiency with Wind 
Dry, cracked and peeling palms, severe itching, dry and brittle
nails, dry skin, slight tremor of the head or hand or both, facial tic,
dizziness, blurred vision, unilateral numbness/tingling of a limb,
Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
Venules On The Thenar Eminence
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Cold in the Stomach
Bluish or bluish-purple venules on the thenar eminence, pain in
the epigastrium, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for
warmth, vomiting of clear fluids (which may alleviate the pain),
nausea, feeling worse after swallowing cold fluids which are
quickly vomited, preference for warm liquids, tongue with thick
white coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Stomach deficient and cold
1617
Short, bluish venules on the thenar eminence, discomfort or dull
pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and better with
pressure or massage, no appetite, preference for warm drinks and
foods, vomiting of clear fluid, no thirst, cold and weak limbs,
tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow
pulse.
Full-Heat
Reddish venules on the thenar eminence, hot hands, red hands,
thirst, a feeling of heat, red face.
Other symptoms and signs depend on which organ is involved,
which may be the Stomach or Lungs.
Empty-Heat
Reddish venules on the thenar eminence, worse in the afternoon
and evening, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat.
Other symptoms and signs depend on which organ is involved,
which may be the Stomach or Lungs.
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Reddish-purple venules on the thenar eminence, severe, stabbing
epigastric pain that may be worse at night, dislike of pressure,
nausea, vomiting, possibly of blood, vomiting of food looking like
coffee grounds, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Yellowish-red venules on the thenar eminence, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness, facial pain,
stuffed nose or thick sticky nasal discharge, thirst without a desire
to drink, nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, a sticky
taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Atrophy Of The Thenar Eminence
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
1618
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Atrophy of the thenar eminence, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness or tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Atrophy of the thenar eminence, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at
night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Atrophy of the thenar eminence, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in
the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Atrophy Of The Muscles Of The Dorsum Of
The Hands
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Atrophy of the muscles of the dorsum of the hands, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Atrophy of the muscles of the dorsum of the hand, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry
mouth and throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty
dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
1619
Atrophy of the muscles of the dorsum of the hand, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
FINGERS
Swollen Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Cold-Dampness Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Swelling and pain of the fingers, which is aggravated by exposure
to cold and damp weather and alleviated by the application of heat
or by exposure to dry weather, cold hands.
Damp-Heat Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Swelling, heat and pain of the fingers, which is aggravated by
exposure to damp weather and alleviated in dry weather.
Wind-Dampness Painful Obstruction Syndrome
Swelling and pain of the fingers, which is aggravated by damp
weather, itching of the hands, vesicles on the skin of the hands.
Lung and Spleen-Yang deficiency
Swelling of the fingers and hands, cold and pale hands, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a
feeling of cold, slight shortness of breath, slight cough with
profuse watery sputum, weak voice, spontaneous daytime
sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency
to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold generally
or of the upper back, absence of thirst, Pale and slightly wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Qi stagnation
1620
Swelling of the fingers before the period in women, hypochondrial
or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump
in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis
Swelling and severe pain of the fingers, contraction of the fingers,
dark complexion, purple nails, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved,
which, in this case, may be the Liver or Heart.
Liver and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat 
Swollen, red and hot fingers, aggravated by exposure to heat,
numbness/tingling of limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, malar flush,
dry eyes, blurred vision, lower backache, dry throat, dry hair and
skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation
or amenorrhoea, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Wind-Water invading the Lungs
Sudden swelling of fingers and face gradually spreading to the
whole body, bright-shiny complexion, scanty and pale urination,
aversion to wind, fever, cough, slight breathlessness, sticky white
tongue coating, Floating-Slippery pulse.
Contraction Of The Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Contraction of the fingers, cold hands, tingling of limbs, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
1621
Contraction of the fingers, thinning of muscles, hot palms, tingling
of the limbs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters in eyes, dry eyes,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion but with red
cheekbones, withered and brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or
Floating-Empty pulse.
Blood stasis
Contraction of the fingers, pain in the hands that is worse at night,
rigidity of the limbs, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Unilateral contraction of the fingers, unilateral numbness/tingling
of a hand, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache, tics, Stiff,
Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm
Unilateral contraction of the fingers, unilateral numbness of a
hand, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, numbness/tingling
of the limbs, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Contraction and swelling of the fingers, numbness, a feeling of
heaviness, cold hands.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Contraction of the fingers that comes and goes according to
emotional moods, hypochondrial/epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
Wiry pulse.
Invasion of external Wind-Cold
Contraction of the fingers with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever,
occipital headache, stiff neck, Floating pulse.
1622
Spoon-Shaped Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Spoon-shaped fingers, cough with expectoration of watery white
sputum, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, nausea, vomiting, a
feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, dull-white
complexion, pale urine, Pale and Swollen tongue with wet-white
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Spoon-shaped fingers, hot fingers, barking cough with profuse,
sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, thirst,
insomnia, agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Spoon-shaped fingers, dry cough which is worse in the evening,
dry throat and mouth, thin body, breathlessness on exertion, lower
backache, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
scanty urination, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Thin, Pointed Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach
Thin, pointed fingers, pain and distension in the abdomen, a
feeling of cold in the abdomen, worsened by ingestion of cold
liquids, a feeling of fullness and pain in the epigastrium, a sticky
taste, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Thin, pointed fingers, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
1623
epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or
thick sticky nasal discharge, thirst without a desire to drink,
nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, a sticky taste,
Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Thin, pointed fingers, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Cracked Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Cracked fingers, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Cracked fingers, purplish hands, hypochondrial/abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in
abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
Cracked fingers, cold and pale hands, a feeling of cold, a slight
feeling of discomfort in the chest, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold causing cracked fingers may
be either of the Heart or of the Lungs.
Thickened Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
1624
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Thickened fingers, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Shrivelled And Wrinkled Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
Loss of Body Fluids
Shrivelled and wrinkled fingers, dry skin, pale complexion, dry
stools.
This is a state of Dryness that may occur after a prolonged spell
of vomiting, sweating or diarrhoea.
NAILS
Ridged Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Ridged nails, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling
of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Ridged, withered and brittle nails, dry nails, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred vision, floaters
in eyes, dry eyes, diminished night vision, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion without lustre but with red
cheekbones, muscular weakness, cramps, very dry skin and hair,
night sweating, depression, a feeling of aimlessness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Thickening Of The Nails
1625
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Fire 
Thickening of the nails, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Thickening of the nails, dark nails, hypochondrial/abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in
abdomen, purple lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue,
Wiry or Firm pulse.
Phlegm 
Thickening of the nails, yellowish nails, swollen hands, a feeling of
heaviness of the limbs, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Coarse And Thick Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Qi and Blood deficiency with dryness of Blood
generating Wind 
 
Coarse and thick nails, ridged nails, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, dry
skin, Pale and dry tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Cracked Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Qi and Blood deficiency with dryness of Blood 
 
Cracked, coarse and thick nails, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, dry skin, Pale and dry
1626
tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Yin deficiency
Cracked nails, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in
small sips, dry throat in the evening, scanty dark urine, dry stools,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Cracked and dark-purplish nails, hypochondrial/abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the
abdomen, purple lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue,
Wiry or Firm pulse.
Nails Falling Off
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Toxic Heat in the Liver
Nails falling off, swollen, hot and painful nails, pus in the nails, a
feeling of heat, mental restlessness, thirst, Red tongue with red
points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Indented Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood deficient and dry 
 
Indented nails, brittle nails, withered nails, dry skin, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale
complexion, scanty menstruation, Pale and dry tongue, Choppy or
Fine pulse.
This is often seen in chronic skin diseases such as eczema and
psoriasis.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Indented nails, brittle nails, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
1627
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Heat injuring Body Fluids
Indented nails, dry nails, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental
restlessness, dry skin, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Thin And Brittle Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Qi and Blood deficiency 
Thin and brittle nails, dry nails, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Thin and brittle nails, dry nails, dry skin, dry eyes, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred vision, floaters
in eyes, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale
complexion without lustre but with red cheekbones, cramps, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or
Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Thin and brittle nails, dark nails, thick nails, dry skin,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Phlegm in the joints
Thin and brittle nails, dry nails, swollen and painful joints, joint
deformities.
1628
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Thin and brittle nails, poor bone development in children,
softening of bones in adults, deafness, weakness of knees and legs,
poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the
hair, weakness of sexual activity, lower backache, infertility,
sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-
Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs
against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and
Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Withered And Brittle Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Withered and brittle nails, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Withered and brittle nails, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes, scanty menstruation, dry skin
and hair, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Withered and brittle nails, purple nails and lips,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple or dark
complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis may cause Dryness and withered and brittle
nails only in severe and advanced cases.
Liver-Fire 
Withered and brittle nails, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
1629
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Withered and brittle nails, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry mouth and throat at
night, lower backache, ache in bones, constipation, scanty dark
urine, tiredness, lassitude, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm 
Withered and brittle nails, thickened and yellow nails, numbness
of the limbs, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Blood Dryness and Empty-Heat in acute febrile
diseases
Withered and brittle nails with acute onset in the aftermath of an
acute febrile disease with high temperature reaching the Blood
level, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Withered And Thickened Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Severe Stomach and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Withered and thickened nails, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in
the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood deficient and dry 
 
Withered and thickened nails, brittle nails, dry skin, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale and dry tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
1630
Liver-Yin deficiency 
 
Withered and thickened but brittle nails, dry nails, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred vision, floaters
in eyes, dry eyes, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale
complexion without lustre but with red cheekbones, cramps, dry
skin and hair, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat
Withered and thickened nails, nail infections, red nails, swollen
junction of the nail and finger, swollen and painful fingers, a
feeling of heat, sticky taste, thirst, mental restlessness, Red tongue
with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Curling Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Qi and Blood deficiency with Blood stasis
Curling nails, purple nails, pain in the hands, poor appetite, loose
stools, weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, palpitations, dark complexion,
Pale or Purple tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Flaking Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Spleen and Kidney deficiency with Dampness
Flaking nails, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
1631
Twisted Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Twisted nails, ridged nails, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Nails With White Spots
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Qi deficiency
Nails with white spots, tiredness, loose stools, shortness of breath,
weak voice, weak limbs, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
This may be Qi deficiency of the Spleen, Heart, Lungs, Liver or
Kidneys.
Pale-White Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver and Spleen-Blood deficiency 
Pale white nails, pale hands, cold hands, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, dull-pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, thin body, scanty
periods or amenorrhoea, insomnia, dizziness, numbness of the
limbs, blurred vision, floaters, diminished night vision, pale lips,
muscular weakness, cramps, withered and brittle nails, dry hair
and skin, slight depression, a feeling of aimlessness, Pale tongue
especially on the sides, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Dull-White Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Spleen and Kidney-Yang deficiency
1632
Dull-white nails, pale hands, cold hands, lower backache, cold
knees, a feeling of cold generally or in the back, weak legs, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, impotence, premature ejaculation,
low sperm count, cold and thin sperm, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at
night, apathy, oedema of the lower legs, infertility in women, loose
stools, depression, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a
desire to lie down, early-morning or chronic diarrhoea, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Loss of Body Fluids
Dull-white, dry nails after profuse sweating, vomiting or diarrhoea,
dry skin.
Red Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Full-Heat
Red nails, red dorsum of the hands, hot hands, a feeling of heat,
mental restlessness, thirst, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Yellow Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Yellow nails, swollen fingers, painful joints, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, loose
stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
1633
Yellow nails, swollen fingers, painful joints, fullness/pain of the
hypochondrium, abdomen or epigastrium, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on
urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red
tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm
Yellowish and thick nails, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
swollen hands, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Bluish-Greenish Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood deficiency with internal Cold
Bluish nails, dry nails, pale and cold hands, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, 
scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion, a feeling of cold, Pale tongue, Choppy or
Fine pulse and Slow pulse.
Severe Spleen-Qi deficiency with internal Wind
(children)
Greenish nails, thin fingers, poor appetite, thin body, retarded
development, flaccid muscles, fine tremor of limbs, Pale tongue,
Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Dark, bluish-green nails, pain in the hands, rigidity of the fingers,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Dark Nails
1634
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Kidney deficiency
Dark nails, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
deficiency of Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang.
Blood stasis
Dark nails, joint pain, dry nails, abdominal pain, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Purple Nails
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Liver-Blood stasis
Purple nails, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark
and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Heat at the Blood level
Purple nails, fever at night, macular rash, bleeding, mental
confusion, Red tongue without coating, Fine and Rapid pulse.
Small Or Absent Lunulae
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Chronic Qi and Blood deficiency
Small or absent lunulae, ridged nails, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Yang deficiency
Small or absent lunulae, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, loose stools,
abundant pale urination, tiredness, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
1635
Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ affected by
Yang deficiency, which may be of the Stomach, Spleen, Heart,
Kidneys or Lungs.
Internal Cold
Small or absent lunulae, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, abdominal
pain which improves with the application of warmth, Pale tongue,
Tight-Slow pulse.
Large Lunulae
Observation,
 
Chapter 15
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Large lunulae, brittle nails, dry throat at night, a feeling of heat in
the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, malar flush, insomnia,
anxiety, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Liver, Lungs, Heart, Stomach or Kidneys.
1636
CHAPTER 66
 
LEGS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
FEET
Oedema
Cold feet
ATROPHY OF THE LEGS
PARALYSIS OF THE LEGS
GAIT
Festination
Unstable gait
Staggering gait
Stepping gait
Shuffling gait
ARCHED LEGS
PAIN
Pain in the thigh
Pain in the hip
Pain in the knee
1637
Pain in the foot
Pain in the groin
Pain in the soles
KNEES
Weak knees
Stiff knees
WEAKNESS OF THE LEGS
A FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LEGS
RESTLESS LEGS
TREMOR OF THE LEGS
CRAMPS IN THE CALVES
LOWER LEG ULCERS
TOE ULCERS
BURNING SENSATION IN THE SOLES
FEET
Oedema
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 18
 
and
 
19
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
;
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapters 64
 
and
 
68
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of legs and abdomen, cold limbs, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold,
Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of ankles and legs, weak knees, lower backache,
cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
1638
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat
Swelling of legs and ankles, ache, swelling, redness and heat of the
joints, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the location of the Damp-
Heat.
Qi stagnation and stasis of Blood
Non-pitting oedema of the legs, in which the skin springs back on
pressing the swollen area, a feeling of distension of the legs,
purplish colour of the legs, hypochondrial/epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in the
abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Swelling of legs and ankles, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
puffy legs, ache in the joints, epigastric fullness, a feeling of
heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky
white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis
Oedema of the limbs, cold hands and feet, pain in the legs,
tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, slight shortness
of breath, dark complexion, abdominal pain, Bluish-Purple tongue,
Weak or Choppy pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember: if oedema is not pitting (i.e. leaves a dent
when pressed with the finger), it is not ‘true’ oedema.
Cold Feet
1639
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Cold feet, oedema of the feet, cold knees, lower backache, cold
knees, feeling cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Cold feet, numbness of the feet, dry feet, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Cold feet, oedema of the feet, cold and weak legs or knees, lower
backache, a feeling of cold generally or in the back, or bright-white
complexion, impotence, decreased libido, tiredness, abundant
clear or scanty clear urination, urination at night, loose stools, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down, early-
morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Phlegm in the Lower Burner
Cold feet, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, numbness of the legs,
abdominal pain, excessive vaginal discharge, Swollen tongue,
Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Cold feet is often a reliable symptom of Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
ATROPHY OF THE LEGS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
1640
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the muscles of the legs, weakness of the
limbs, muscular weakness, gait like a duck, feet turning in or out,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools, uncomfortable feeling in
the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
In children this corresponds to the sequelae stage of
poliomyelitis.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Atrophy or thinning of the leg muscles, weak knees, staggering
gait, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing, lower
backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This pattern is more common in the elderly.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the leg muscles, cold and weak knees,
oedema of the lower legs, muscular weakness, lower backache,
feelings of cold generally or in the back, weak legs, bright-white
complexion, decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
or scanty clear urination, urination at night, loose stools, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down, early-
morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Atrophy or thinning of the leg muscles, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Atrophy or thinning of the leg muscles, late physical/mental
development in children, inability to grasp with the hands,
1641
inability to put feet down.
This pattern occurs only in children or babies and is often
associated with the Five Retardations (slow development in
children involving standing, walking, teeth development, hair
development and speech) and the Five Flaccidities (late closure of
the fontanelles, flaccidity of mouth, hands, feet and muscles).
PARALYSIS OF THE LEGS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Paralysis of the legs, weak and cold limbs, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the
epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Paralysis of the legs, weak limbs, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Paralysis of the legs, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred
vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails,
night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Retention of Dampness in the muscles
Paralysis of the legs, a feeling of heaviness of the body or limbs,
swelling of the limbs, epigastric fullness, sticky taste, sticky tongue
coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
1642
Paralysis of the legs, pain in the limbs which may be worse at
night, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and
clotted menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and
lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm
pulse.
Wind and Phlegm in the channels 
Paralysis of the leg on one side, numbness of the limbs, severe
dizziness, blurred vision, tremors, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
This corresponds to the sequelae stage of Wind-stroke.
GAIT
Festination
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
‘Festination’ refers to a particular gait whereby the patient lifts
the feet up higher than necessary and then steps forward in a haste
as if trying to avoid falling forwards.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind 
Festination, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle
nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, tremors, tic, normal-coloured, Deviated or Moving
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and slightly Wiry pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency with internal Wind 
 
Festination, weak limbs, slight tremor of the limbs, tic, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tired-ness, blurred vision,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale
complexion, Pale and Deviated or Moving tongue, Weak or Choppy
1643
and slightly Wiry pulse.
Unstable Gait
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind 
Unstable gait, severe dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of 
the limbs, dry eyes, blurred
vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails,
night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
tremors, tic, normal-coloured, Deviated or Moving tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and slightly Wiry pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency with internal Wind 
 
Unstable gait, weak limbs, slight tremor of the limbs, tic, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale
complexion, Pale and Deviated or Moving tongue, Weak or Choppy
and slightly Wiry pulse.
Staggering Gait
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Staggering gait, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred
vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails,
night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis 
Staggering gait, pain in the legs which is worse at night, swollen
legs, heaviness of the legs, Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry-
1644
Slippery pulse.
Stepping Gait
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind 
Stepping gait, severe dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache,
insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred
vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails,
night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
tremors, tic, normal-coloured, Deviated or Moving tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and slightly Wiry pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency with internal Wind 
 
Stepping gait, weak limbs, slight tremor of the limbs, tic, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, tired-ness, blurred vision,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale
complexion, Pale and Deviated or Moving tongue, Weak or Choppy
and slightly Wiry pulse.
Shuffling Gait
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Wind-Phlegm in
the channels 
Shuffling gait, numbness/tingling of the limbs or legs, tremors,
severe dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing, lower
backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle
nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, tremors, tic, normal-coloured, Deviated or Moving
and Swollen tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and slightly
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
1645
ARCHED LEGS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 19
Congenital deficiency of Stomach and Spleen 
Arched legs in children, thinness and weakness in children, poor
digestion, weakness of the legs, abdominal distension, poor
appetite, loose stools, tiredness.
Congenital deficiency of Liver and Kidneys 
Arched legs in children, thinness and weakness in children,
weakness of the legs and knees, or back, nocturnal enuresis.
PAIN
Pain In The Thigh
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Damp-Heat
Burning pain in the inner thigh that may extend to the external
genitalia, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, 
a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, excessive vaginal discharge, vaginal redness or
soreness and itching, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Ache in the inner thigh that is aggravated by exposure to cold and
alleviated by application of heat, a feeling of heaviness of the legs,
dull-pale complexion, cold limbs, excessive white vaginal
discharge, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis
Ache in the thigh that is worse at night, muscular weakness, weak
limbs, tiredness, dark complexion, rigidity of the knees, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
1646
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic dull ache in the thigh, cold and weak knees, lower
backache, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood in the descending
branch of the Penetrating Vessel
Ache in the inner thigh, often in conjunction with the period in
women, cold feet, a feeling of heat in the face, abdominal fullness
and pain, irregular periods, visible venules on the inside of the
legs, Firm pulse.
Pain In The Hip
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Stabbing hip pain that is worse at night, marked rigidity of the
joint, a feeling of distension of the legs, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Invasion of Cold and Dampness
Unilateral, severe hip pain which is aggravated by exposure to cold
and alleviated by application of heat, a feeling of heaviness of the
legs, cold legs, rigidity.
Pain In The Knee
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Invasion of Cold and Dampness
Unilateral severe pain in the knee that is aggravated by exposure to
cold and alleviated by the application of heat, rigidity of the joint,
swelling of the knee, a feeling of heaviness of the legs.
Invasion of Cold
Unilateral severe pain in the knee that is aggravated by exposure to
1647
cold and alleviated by the application of heat, better with exercise
and worse with rest, rigidity of the joint.
Damp-Heat
Severe pain in the knee, with redness, swelling and heat.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Pain in the knee that does not react to weather conditions, pain
aggravated by movement and ameliorated by rest, with no
swelling. This is usually caused by repetitive strain injury or
sprain.
Kidney deficiency
Chronic dull ache and weakness in both knees, of gradual onset,
better with rest, worse with exercise, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Pain In The Foot
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Dampness
Ache and swelling of the feet, cold feet, a feeling of heaviness of
the legs.
Damp-Heat
Ache and swelling of the feet, hot, red and smelling feet, a feeling
of heaviness of the legs.
Kidney deficiency
Dull ache in the feet, weak knees, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus.
Other manifestations depend on whether there is Yin or Yang
deficiency.
1648
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Dull ache in the feet, numbness of feet, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Damp-Phlegm
Ache in the dorsum or ball of the foot, tingling of the feet, a
feeling of heaviness of the legs, a tendency to obesity, Swollen
tongue, Slippery pulse.
Pain In The Groin
Dampness
Pain in the groin, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, swelling, sticky
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood in the Liver
channel
Severe pain in the groin that is alleviated by mild exercise,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, painful periods, dark and clotted
menstrual blood, masses in the abdomen, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Girdle Vessel pathology (Damp-Heat)
Pain in the groin that radiates from the lower abdomen, a feeling
of heaviness, abdominal full-ness, excessive vaginal discharge,
unilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry pulse on both Middle
positions.
Pain In The Soles
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Stomach-Qi deficiency
1649
Dull ache in the soles (ball of the foot) of slow onset, weak legs, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, no appetite, lack of
sense of taste, loose stools, tiredness especially in the morning,
weak limbs, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Dull ache in the soles (ball of the foot) of acute onset, swelling of
the ball of the foot, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, weak legs, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of appetite, lack of
sense of taste, loose stools, tiredness especially in the morning,
weak limbs, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Burning pain in the ball of the foot, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Burning pain under the big toe, hot feet, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Dampness in the Spleen
Dull ache under the big toe, swelling of the foot, a feeling of
heaviness of the legs, sweaty feet, a feeling of fullness in the
epigastrium and abdomen, a sticky taste, sticky tongue coating,
Slippery pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dull ache in the soles, cold feet, cold and weak knees, lower
backache, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
1650
Dull ache in the soles in the evening or night, burning sensation in
the soles, weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney deficiency with Dampness
Dull ache in the soles with a slight puffiness, a feeling of heaviness
and weakness of the legs, weak knees, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
KNEES
Weak Knees
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weak and cold knees, lower backache, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency 
Weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing,
lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Weak knees, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
1651
lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stiff Knees
Cold-Dampness in the channels
Stiff and swollen knees, a cold feeling in the knees or legs, knee
ache that is aggravated by exposure to cold and dampness and
alleviated by the application of heat, a feeling of heaviness of the
legs.
Cold in the channels
Stiff and painful knees, pain that is aggravated by exposure to cold
and alleviated by the application of heat.
Dampness
Stiff knees, swollen knees, numbness of the legs, a feeling of
heaviness of the legs, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
Stiff knees, swollen, red, painful and hot knees, numbness of the
legs, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, sticky yellow tongue
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Stiff knees, painful knees, ameliorated by mild exercise, stiff
tendons, may be worse at night, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight stiffness of the knees, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
WEAKNESS OF THE LEGS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
1652
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Weakness of the limbs or legs, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, loose
stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense
of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weakness of the legs, cold feet and legs, oedema of the ankles,
weak and cold knees, lower backache, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Weakness of the legs, thin legs, unsteady walking, hot soles at
night, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Weakness of the legs, thin legs, unsteady walking, hot soles at
night, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing, lower
backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
A FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE
LEGS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 64
Dampness
A feeling of heaviness of the legs or in general, numbness,
1653
swelling of the legs, epigastric fullness, sticky tongue coating,
Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat
A feeling of heaviness of the legs, swelling of the legs, hot feet,
muscle ache, numbness, epigastric fullness, sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
A slight feeling of heaviness of the legs, weakness of the limbs,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools, abdominal fullness, a
feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested food
in the stools, nausea, dull frontal headache, Pale tongue with sticky
coating, Soggy pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Dampness
A slight feeling of heaviness of the legs, weak/cold knees, lower
backache, feeling cold, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
decreased libido, excessive vaginal discharge, Pale and wet tongue
with a sticky coating, Deep-Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
A feeling of heaviness of the legs is a certain symptom
of Dampness in the Lower Burner.
RESTLESS LEGS
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Restless legs in the evening, hot feet in bed at night with a desire
to stick them out of the bed, weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle
1654
nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Restless legs, weak legs, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire
to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric
pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but
no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, slight feeling
of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or
without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
 
Restless legs, numbness/tingling of the legs, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Deficiency of Blood in the Penetrating Vessel 
Restless legs, anxiety, dizziness, scanty periods, irregular periods,
abdominal and umbilical fullness, numbness/tingling of the legs
and big toes, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I find ST-36 Zusanli, ST-37 Shangjuxu and ST-39
Xiajuxu in combination an effective treatment for
restless legs.
TREMOR OF THE LEGS
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 4
 
and
 
18
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 64
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency leading to Wind 
Mild tremor of the legs, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, scanty menstruation, dry eyes, fine tremor
of legs, tic, vertigo, Pale tongue with coating, or normal-coloured
1655
without coating, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind 
Mild tremor of the legs, vertigo, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, vertigo, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, ache in bones, nocturnal
emissions, constipation, scanty dark urine, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight anxiety, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
CRAMPS IN THE CALVES
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Cramps in the calves at night or during moderate exercise,
numbness/tingling of legs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind 
Severe cramps in the calves at night, numbness/tingling of the
legs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, 
scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, vertigo, tremors, Pale tongue, Fine and slightly
Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Severe cramps in the calves, numbness/tingling of the legs, a
feeling of heaviness of the legs, severe dizziness, blurred vision,
tremors, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe cramps in the calves which are often worse at night,
abdominal pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
1656
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I find BL-57 Chengshan an effective point for cramps
in the calves.
LOWER LEG ULCERS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat
Ulcers on the lower legs, red, painful, swollen, oozing a sticky
yellow fluid, itchy, hardness of the edges of the ulcer after oozing
fluid, a feeling of heaviness, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Ulcers on the lower leg, swollen, not painful, pale red, oozing a
thin fluid, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor
digestion, undigested food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal
headache, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
Ulcers on the lower legs, dark in colour, painful, hard, oozing a
turbid fluid, pain in the legs, a feeling of distension of the legs,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Ulcers on the lower leg, not painful, pale red, dizziness, tinnitus,
weak knees, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or
vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry
eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin,
brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
1657
TOE ULCERS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 21
Toxic Heat
Dark ulcers on the toes, oozing a dark fluid or blood and festering,
a burning pain that is worse at night, insomnia, mental
restlessness, thirst, Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky
yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
External Toxic Heat
Ulcers on the toes, especially the inner aspect of the big toe, dark
nails, swelling on the side of the nail, pain, Floating pulse.
BURNING SENSATION IN THE SOLES
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 39
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Burning sensation in the soles that is worse in the evening or at
night, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry
mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening,
malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, lower
backache, scanty dark urine, insomnia, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Burning sensation in the ball of the foot, burning epigastric pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Burning sensation under the big toe, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
1658
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
1659
CHAPTER 67
 
LOWER BACK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LOWER BACKACHE
SCIATICA
FEELING OF COLD AND HEAVINESS OF THE LOWER BACK
WEAKNESS OF THE LOWER BACK AND KNEES
STIFFNESS OF THE LOWER BACK
COCCYX PAIN
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
SKIN SIGNS
Spots on the back
Vesicles on the lower back
Dryness and redness of the skin of the lower
back
Yellow colour of the lower back
Skin marks on the lower back
Boils on BL-23 Shenshu
Ulcers on the buttocks
1660
Papules or pustules on the buttocks
SPINAL CURVATURE
Scoliosis
Lordosis
Spine bent forward
Kyphosis
Flattening of lumbar spine
List of spine
LOWER BACKACHE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic lower backache, which may be unilateral, bilateral or on
the midline and which may recur in bouts, a feeling of weakness
and cold of the lower back, better with rest and worse with
exercise, weak and cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Chronic lower backache, which may be unilateral, bilateral or on
the midline and which may recur in bouts, a feeling of weakness of
the lower back, contraction of the muscles of the lower back, better
with rest and worse with exercise, thin body, weak knees,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, constipation, scanty dark
urine, tiredness, slight anxiety, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
1661
Sprain of the back
Acute, severe backache, which may be unilateral or on the midline,
rigidity of the back with inability to bend forward, pain in the leg.
Cold-Dampness in the lower back
Acute or chronic backache that is worse in the morning and better
as the day progresses, better with light exercise and worse with
rest, feeling of heaviness, a feeling of cold.
Blood stasis in the back
Chronic, severe unilateral lower backache that improves with light
exercise and worsens with rest, worse in the morning but also at
night, rigidity of the back, pain centred in a small area, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Sudden backache on the midline extending from the occiput to the
lower back, aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy throat, slight
breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose with clear watery discharge,
sneezing, occipital headache, body aches, thin white tongue
coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In chronic lower backache there is always a Kidney
deficiency and I always use BL-23 Shenshu.
SCIATICA
Apart from identifying the pattern, the affected channel must be
identified. The channels affected are the Bladder, Gall-Bladder or
Stomach; often more than one channel is involved.
Cold-Dampness in the lower back and legs
Dull pain in the leg that is worse in the morning,
numbness/tingling of the leg, a feeling of heaviness of the leg, pain
1662
aggravated by exposure to cold and dampness and ameliorated by
the application of heat.
Damp-Heat in the lower back and legs
Severe pain in the leg that is worse in the afternoon or evening,
numbness/tingling of the leg, a feeling of heaviness and heat of
the leg.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Severe stabbing pain in the leg that is slightly better with
movement and worse with rest or sitting and during the night,
pain slightly ameliorated by the application of heat.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Dampness
Dull ache in the leg that is better with rest and worse with
overexertion, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of
heaviness of the legs, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue with sticky
coating, Deep-Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, in sciatica if the pulse is Rapid and
Slippery and the tongue is Red with a sticky yellow
coating, it is more difficult to treat.
FEELING OF COLD AND HEAVINESS
OF THE LOWER BACK
Kidney-Yang deficiency
A chronic feeling of cold and heaviness of the lower back, a desire
to apply warmth to the lower back, worse for exposure to cold and
dampness, weak and cold knees, a feeling as if sitting in cold
water, cold feet, lower backache, a feeling of cold, bright-white
1663
complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the back
A feeling of cold and heaviness of the lower back, a feeling of
heaviness in general, chronic backache, cold legs, sticky white
tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Water
A sudden feeling of cold and heaviness of the lower back, oedema
of the ankles, aversion to cold, Floating pulse.
WEAKNESS OF THE LOWER BACK
AND KNEES
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weak back and knees, lower backache, cold knees, better with rest
and worse with exercise, a feeling of cold, cold feet, bright-white
complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency 
Weak back and knees, lower backache, a feeling of heat, hot feet in
bed at night, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor
memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the lower back
Weak back and knees, a feeling of heaviness and cold of the lower
back, lower backache, swollen feet, worse with exposure to damp
and cold and better with application of warmth.
1664
Damp-Heat in the lower back
Weak back and knees, a feeling of heaviness and burning of the
lower back, lower backache, swollen and hot feet, worse with
exposure to damp and heat and better in dry weather.
STIFFNESS OF THE LOWER BACK
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Severe stiffness of the lower back, inability or difficulty in bending
forward or turning the waist, backache, stiffness alleviated by
moderate exercise and aggravated by inactivity, Wiry pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the lower back
Stiffness of the lower back, a feeling of heaviness of the back,
numbness/tingling of the legs, stiffness worse in the morning and
better as the day progresses.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight stiffness of the lower back, dull backache, weak and cold
knees, lower backache, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
COCCYX PAIN
Traumatic injury
Coccyx pain with history of traumatic injury, difficulty in walking,
lying down or turning, pain aggravated by coughing and sneezing.
Kidney deficiency
Dull ache in the coccyx not related to movement numbness, with
no history of traumatic injury, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus,
Weak pulse.
1665
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Cold-Dampness in the Bladder channel
Coccyx pain, a feeling of heaviness of the legs, numbness/tingling
of the legs, pain aggravated by exposure to cold or dampness and
ameliorated by the application of heat.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder channel
Severe coccyx pain, a feeling of heaviness of the legs,
numbness/tingling of the legs, a feeling of heat in the lower back.
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG
THE SPINE
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Atrophy of the muscles along the spine, weak muscles, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight depression, tendency to obesity, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Retention of Damp-Cold
Rigidity of the lower back, swelling of the muscles of the lower
back, backache that is worse with rest and better with moderate
activity, a feeling of cold of the back, a feeling of heaviness of the
back.
Blood stasis
Rigidity of the lower back, backache that may be worse at night,
1666
stabbing pain of the lower back that is worse with rest and better
with movement, Wiry pulse.
SKIN SIGNS
Spots On The Back
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat
Red papules on the upper back with acute onset, aversion to cold,
fever, tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Floating-Overflowing-Rapid.
Damp-Heat
Red papules or pustules on the back, lower backache, a feeling of
heaviness of the back, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Stomach, Spleen or Liver.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat
Red papules on the back which may be itchy and painful,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a slight feeling of
oppression of the chest, irritability, premenstrual tension, irregular
periods, premenstrual breast distension, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, a feeling of heat, red face, thirst, propensity to outbursts of
anger, heavy periods, tongue Red on the sides, Wiry and slightly
Rapid pulse.
Vesicles On The Lower Back
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Retention of Damp-Heat
Vesicles filled with clear fluid on the lower back which look like a
string of pearls, backache, a feeling of heaviness of the back, sticky
1667
yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Dryness And Redness Of The Skin Of The
Lower Back
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Liver-Fire
Red and dry macular rash on the skin of the lower back that is
itchy and hot, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red and dry macular rash on the skin of the lower and upper back
that is itchy and hot, dark urine, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Yellow Colour Of The Lower Back
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Damp-Heat in the Spleen and Kidneys
Yellow colour of the lower back, small vesicles on the lower back,
backache, a feeling of heaviness of the back, turbid urine, sticky
yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Skin Marks On The Lower Back
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Girdle Vessel pathology with Kidney deficiency
A discoloration of the skin of the lower back like long skin marks
1668
often distributed like a belt, not itchy, not painful, lower backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of heaviness of the lower abdomen
and back, urinary discomfort, excessive vaginal discomfort, a
feeling of bearing down.
Boils On BL-23 Shenshu
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Phlegm with Kidney deficiency
Boils on BL-23 Shenshu, a feeling of heaviness of the back, swelling
of the muscles of the back, lower backache that is alleviated by
rest, weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue, Weak pulse.
Ulcers On The Buttocks
Toxic Heat
Unilateral ulcers on the buttock, red, swollen and painful in the
centre with a red edge around, indistinct 
margins, oozing a sticky
yellow fluid and festering, thirst, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with
red points and a thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
External Toxic Heat
Ulcers on the buttocks, red, swollen and painful with sudden
onset, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Papules Or Pustules On The Buttocks
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Papules or pustules on buttocks, frequent and urgent urination,
burning on urination, difficult urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine,
thirst with no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a
feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with
1669
red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
SPINAL CURVATURE
Scoliosis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Congenital scoliosis, lower backache, weakness of the knees and
legs, poor bone development in children, softening of bones in
adults, deafness, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or
premature greying of the hair, weakness of sexual activity,
infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
Kidney deficiency with Blood stasis
Scoliosis, severe lower backache, stiff back, dizziness, tinnitus.
Other symptoms and signs, including tongue and pulse, depend
on whether there is Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Retention of Wind-Dampness in the channels of the
back
Scoliosis, backache that is aggravated by damp and cold weather, a
feeling of heaviness in the back.
Lordosis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Congenital lordosis, lower backache, weak knees, poor bone
development in children, softening of bones in adults, deafness,
poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the
1670
hair, weakness of sexual activity, infertility, sterility, dizziness,
tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-Empty or Leather
pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs against a background of
Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if
against a background of Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Deficiency of Liver- and Kidney-Yin 
Lordosis, lower backache, weak knees, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Retention of Wind-Dampness in the channels of the
back
Lordosis, backache that is aggravated by damp and cold weather, a
feeling of heaviness in the back.
Deficiency of the Stomach and Spleen
Lordosis, weak limbs, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spine Bent Forward
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Kidney-Essence deficiency with weakness of the
Governing Vessel
Spine bent forward, lower backache, weakness of the knees and
legs, poor bone development in children, softening of bones in
adults, deafness, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or
premature greying of the hair, weakness of sexual activity,
infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue 
and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
1671
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
If a person is born with such deformity of the spine, the
condition is constitutional and there may not be any other
symptoms.
Kyphosis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Kidney-Essence deficiency in the elderly 
Kyphosis, softening of bones, deafness, weakness of knees and
legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of
the hair, weakness of sexual activity, lower backache, infertility,
sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-
Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs
against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and
Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Kyphosis, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees,
hardness of hearing, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Deficiency of the Governing Vessel
Kyphosis, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory, weak
sexual function.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Kidney-Essence deficiency in children 
Congenital kyphosis, poor bone development, weakness of knees
1672
and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-Empty or Leather
pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs against a background of
Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if
against a background of Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Flattening Of Lumbar Spine
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Qi stagnation
Flattening of the lumbar spine, stiffness of the spinal muscles,
backache that improves with gentle exercise, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, pre-menstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis
Flattening of the lumbar spine, stiffness of the spinal muscles,
rigidity of the back, backache that improves with gentle exercise
and is worse at night, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Cold
Flattening of lumbar spine, backache that improves with the
application of heat and is aggravated by exposure to cold and
dampness, a feeling of cold, cold back and knees, Pale tongue,
Tight-Slow pulse.
List Of Spine
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 11
Qi stagnation
List of spine, stiffness of the spinal muscles, backache that
improves with gentle exercise, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
1673
Blood stasis
List of spine, stiffness of the spinal muscles, rigidity of the back,
backache that improves with gentle exercise and is worse at night,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Cold
List of spine, backache that improves with the application of heat
and is aggravated by exposure to cold and dampness, a feeling of
cold, cold back and knees, Pale tongue, Tight-Slow pulse.
1674
CHAPTER 68
 
BODY
CHAPTER CONTENTS
BODY ACHES
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
LOSS OF FEELING
Paralysis
Hemiplegia
Numbness/tingling
Numbness of half the body
ITCHING
OEDEMA
WEIGHT CHANGE
Obesity
Loss of weight
JAUNDICE
TWITCHING OF MUSCLES
OPISTHOTONOS
BODY ACHES
1675
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
Body aches include aches in the muscles or joints, or both.
Wind
Ache in the joints, aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache,
Floating pulse.
This is a pain that occurs in acute invasions of Wind.
Dampness
Ache in the muscles and joints, a feeling of heaviness, headache
with a feeling as if the head were wrapped in cotton wool, sticky
tongue coating, Soggy or Slippery pulse.
This is probably the most common type of joint and muscle
ache, and can be either acute of chronic. It is seen in Fixed Painful
Obstruction Syndrome and in postviral fatigue syndrome.
Qi stagnation
Ache in the joints (especially of the upper part of the body) which
is better with exercise, a feeling of distension of the limbs, Wiry
pulse.
Blood stasis
Severe stabbing pain in the joints which is better with exercise,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
This pattern is more likely to occur in the elderly but it is also
relatively frequent in women suffering from Blood stasis. For
example, it may occur after childbirth if there is stasis of Blood.
Blood deficiency
Dull ache in all the muscles which is worse after exercise,
frequently after childbirth, tingling of the limbs, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Pain in all the muscles, skin hot to the touch, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1676
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
Invasion of Wind in the joints
Pain moving from joint to joint, in acute cases a Floating pulse.
Invasion of Dampness in the joints
Fixed pain, swelling of the joints, a feeling of heaviness and
tingling of the joints.
Invasion of Cold in the joints
Fixed, severe pain, usually in one joint, aggravated by exposure to
cold and alleviated by application of heat.
Damp-Heat in the joints
Fixed pain, swollen, hot and red joints.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Pain and rigidity of the joints, stiff limbs, pain ameliorated by
moderate exercise and aggravated by inactivity, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull joint ache, worse with exercise or after the period, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Dull joint ache especially of the lower limbs that is worse with
exercise, lower backache, weak knees, weak legs.
LOSS OF FEELING
Paralysis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 4
This refers to bilateral paralysis of the arms/legs and of the body
1677
itself.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Paralysis, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense
of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
In neurological problems such as multiple sclerosis, this pattern
corresponds to the middle stage.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Long-term paralysis of slow onset, weak limbs, weak knees,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull
occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair
and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
In neurological problems such as multiple sclerosis, this pattern
corresponds to the late stage.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind 
Long-term paralysis of slow onset, tremor/spasms of limbs, weak
limbs, weak knees, numbness/tingling of the limbs, lower
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, dull occipital or
vertical headache, insomnia, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in
the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry
stools, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured
Deviated or Moving tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
slightly Wiry pulse.
In neurological problems such as multiple sclerosis, this pattern
corresponds to the final stage.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Paralysis, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
1678
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency
Paralysis of the four limbs and body, weak limbs, poor appetite,
loose stools, weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion,
Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Paralysis, stabbing pain in the joints, hypochondrial or abdominal
pain, painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in
the abdomen, purple nails and 
lips, purple or dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Paralysis, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, numbness, oedema
of the limbs, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky white tongue coating,
Slippery-Slow pulse.
In neurological problems such as multiple sclerosis, this
corresponds to the initial stage.
Damp-Heat
Paralysis of the lower limbs, hot limbs, a feeling of heaviness of
the limbs, numbness of the limbs, epigastric fullness, a sticky
taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, a feeling of heat, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-Blood deficiency
Paralysis, numbness/tingling of limbs, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
and slightly Wiry pulse.
Stomach and Spleen Fluids injured
1679
Paralysis with sudden onset after a febrile disease, weak limbs,
inability to grasp with hands, dry skin and mouth.
This pattern corresponds to the aftermath of a febrile disease
such as polio.
Hemiplegia
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 4
This refers to unilateral paralysis of the arm/leg. The first six
patterns correspond to different types of Wind-stroke.
Wind in the channels
Hemiplegia, deviation of eye and mouth, aphasia.
Liver-Wind
Hemiplegia, tremors, numbness of limbs, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Hemiplegia, numbness or tingling of the limbs, severe dizziness,
blurred vision, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Fire
Hemiplegia, numbness of the limbs, sudden unconsciousness,
mental confusion, deviation of eye and mouth, contraction of the
hands, clenched teeth, red eyes and face, rattling sound in the
throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, expectoration of sticky
yellow sputum, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm
Hemiplegia, numbness of the limbs, sudden unconsciousness,
mental confusion, phlegm in the throat, clenched teeth, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, expectoration of profuse, sticky
sputum, pasty-white complexion, cold limbs, Swollen tongue with
1680
a sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis
Hemiplegia, dull skin colour, oedema, rigidity of the tendons,
contraction of the upper limbs, lower limbs relaxed and stretched,
stretching of the upper limbs or bending of the lower limbs causes
pain, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, slight
shortness of breath, pale complexion, Bluish-Purple tongue, Weak
or Choppy pulse.
This corresponds to the sequelae stage of Wind-stroke.
Liver and Kidney deficiency
Hemiplegia, lower backache, soft limbs, dizziness, tinnitus, poor
memory, blurred vision, mental confusion.
This pattern may be associated with a Yin and or Yang deficiency
and the tongue may be Red or Pale respectively. This pattern also
corresponds to the sequelae stage of Wind-stroke.
Collapse of Yang
Hemiplegia, sudden unconsciousness, mental confusion, eyes
shut, mouth and hands open, urinary incontinence, weak
breathing, cold limbs, bright-white complexion, sweating on the
forehead, Pale and Short tongue, Hidden or Scattered pulse.
This corresponds to an acute stage of Wind-stroke.
Collapse of Yin
Hemiplegia, sudden unconsciousness, deviation of eye and mouth,
eyes shut, mouth and hands open, cold limbs but red face, weak
breathing, Red tongue without coating, Minute pulse.
This corresponds to an acute stage of Wind-stroke.
Numbness/Tingling
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
‘Numbness’ includes numbness itself or a tingling sensation, or
both together. Numbness is more common in Phlegm and Wind,
whereas tingling is more common in deficiency patterns such as
1681
Liver-Blood deficiency. However, this is only a broad rule.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Tingling of limbs, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
This is a very common cause of numbness/tingling and it occurs
more frequently in women.
Phlegm in the channels
Numbness, a feeling of heaviness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, phlegm in the throat, Swollen tongue with a sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Dampness in the channels
Numbness/tingling, swollen joints, a feeling of heaviness of the
body and limbs, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether the Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat.
Internal Wind 
Unilateral numbness of a limb, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus,
headache, numbness of the limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Unilateral numbness of a limb, tingling, tremors, severe dizziness,
blurred vision, tinnitus, nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Numbness/tingling of limbs, joint pain that is ameliorated by
moderate exercise and aggravated by inactivity, tiredness, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, slight shortness of breath, pale
complexion, Bluish-Purple tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
1682
Numbness Of Half The Body
Numbness of half the body usually occurs in the limbs.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Numbness of half the body, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
This numbness often occurs on the left side and more frequently
in women.
Damp-Phlegm
Numbness of half the body, chronic cough with expectoration of
profuse, sticky white sputum which is easy to expectorate, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence,
nausea, sputum in the throat, muzziness of the head, Swollen
tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver-Wind 
Numbness of half the body and a hand, tremors, severe dizziness,
tinnitus, headache, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry
pulse.
This pattern is more likely to occur in old people. In the elderly,
numbness of half the body may herald Wind-stroke.
Deficiency of Central Qi
Numbness of half the body, soft and weak limbs, Poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
This pattern is due to a deficiency of Stomach and Spleen and
the numbness often occurs on the right side.
Dampness
Numbness of half the body, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs,
swelling of the limbs/joints, muscle ache, sticky tongue coating,
1683
Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether the Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat.
ITCHING
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
Wind in the skin
Intense itching in the whole body or moving from place to place,
more in the upper body, an unbearable desire to scratch, dry skin.
Dampness in the skin
Localized itching often in the lower part of the body, vesicles on
the skin, oozing a fluid.
Damp-Heat in the skin
Localized itching, yellow vesicles oozing a yellow fluid, red
papules or pustules, oozing blood on scratching, more in the lower
part of the body.
Blood-Heat
Generalized itching, red rash, red papules, feeling of agitation,
thirst.
Blood deficiency
Mild generalized itching, dry skin, scaly skin (with white scales),
dry hair, possibly pale wheals.
Toxic Heat
Localized or generalized intense itching, pustules oozing pus and
blood, festering skin, fever.
This kind of itching is seen in chronic eczema when the skin
becomes infected.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
To treat itching with acupuncture, apart from using
1684
points that expel Wind (TB-6 Zhigou and GB-31
Fengshi), I use points on the Heart channel.
OEDEMA
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Chronic pitting oedema of the abdomen or limbs, slow onset, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, oedema, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pitting oedema of the whole body starting from the legs, worse on
the ankles, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
This is probably the most common cause of chronic oedema and
it is nearly always associated with Spleen-Yang deficiency.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Oedema starting on the face and limbs, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling
of limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Dampness
Oedema of the limbs and abdomen, slow onset, tiredness, a
feeling of heaviness of the body and limbs, a feeling of fullness of
the epigastrium, ache in the muscles, sticky tongue coating,
Slippery pulse.
Wind-Water invading the Lungs
1685
Sudden swelling of eyes, face and hands gradually spreading to
the whole body, bright-shiny complexion, scanty and pale
urination, aversion to wind, fever, cough, slight breathlessness,
sticky white tongue coating, Floating-Slippery pulse.
This is an acute type of oedema and this pattern is a type of
external Wind-Cold.
Qi stagnation
Non-pitting oedema of the body or limbs, irritability, a feeling of
distension especially of the limbs, Wiry pulse.
Qi deficiency and Blood stasis
Oedema of the body or limbs, cold hands and feet, numbness of
the limbs, muscular weakness, purple colour of hands/feet,
tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Choppy pulse.
WEIGHT CHANGE
Obesity
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 1
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
Obesity in Chinese medicine is always due to Dampness or
Phlegm (deriving from Qi or Yang deficiency) retained in the space
between the skin and muscles.
Damp-Phlegm with Qi deficiency
Obesity, chronic cough with expectoration of profuse, sticky white
sputum which is easy to expectorate, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence, nausea, sputum in
the throat, muzziness of the head, tiredness, poor appetite, loose
stools, weak voice, slight shortness of breath, pale complexion,
Pale and Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Loss Of Weight
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 1
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 37
1686
Yin deficiency
Loss of weight, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in
small sips, dry throat in the evening, dark-scanty urine, dry stools,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This may be Yin deficiency of various organs such as Lungs,
Stomach, Heart, Kidneys, Liver and Spleen.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Loss of weight, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Loss of weight, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of sense of taste sensation, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Normally Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency leads to obesity
but it may also lead to weight loss because the Food Essences are
not absorbed by the body.
Liver-Fire
Loss of weight, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Loss of weight, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
JAUNDICE
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 3
1687
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Jaundice, yellow eyes, bright-yellow complexion, hypochondrial
pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting, inability to digest
fats, yellow sclera, scanty dark- yellow urine, thirst without a desire
to drink, bitter taste, irritability, headache, a feeling of heaviness of
the body, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow tongue coating,
either bilateral in two strips or unilateral, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Gall-Bladder
Jaundice, dull-yellow eyes and skin, hypochondrial pain, fullness
and distension, nausea, vomiting, an inability to digest fats, dull-
yellow sclera, turbid urine, no thirst, sticky taste, dull headache, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, a feeling of cold, thick, sticky
white tongue coating, either bilateral in two strips or unilateral,
Slippery-Wiry-Slow pulse.
Blood stasis
Jaundice, dull-yellow skin, dark complexion, a feeling of mass in
the hypochondrium, hypochondrial or abdominal pain, lines on
the skin like a spider’s web, dark stools, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency and Blood deficiency
Jaundice, dull-yellow skin, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
This pattern is due Liver-Blood deficiency which leads to Liver-
Qi stagnation and bile not flowing; this is a deficient type of
jaundice.
TWITCHING OF MUSCLES
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 4
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
1688
Twitching of muscles, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a
feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased
libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant
 
clear urination, urination at
night, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a
desire to lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart- or Lung-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing
Twitching of muscles, palpitations, dizziness, nausea, vomiting of
watery, frothy white fluid, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, severe
shortness of breath, a feeling of fullness and stuffiness of the chest
and epigastrium, thirst with no desire to drink, urinary retention,
Pale, Swollen and wet tongue, Deep-Wiry or Deep-Fine-Slippery
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Twitching of muscles, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
OPISTHOTONOS
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 4
Liver-Wind
Opisthotonos, tremors, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
numbness of limbs, tics, Stiff, Deviated or Moving tongue, Wiry
pulse.
1689
CHAPTER 69
 
DIGESTIVE
SYSTEM AND
TASTE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
BELCHING
REGURGITATION
Sour regurgitation
Regurgitation of food
HICCUP
HUNGER AND EATING
Poor appetite
Excessive hunger
Aversion to food
Hunger with no desire to eat
Gnawing hunger
Craving for sweets/constant picking
SLEEPINESS AFTER EATING
1690
NAUSEA, RETCHING AND VOMITING
Nausea
Vomiting
Retching
Vomiting of blood
DIFFICULTY IN SWALLOWING (DIAPHRAGM CHOKING)
TASTE
Bitter taste
Sweet taste
Salty taste
Sour taste
Sticky taste
Loss of taste
Foul breath
The symptoms of epigastric and abdominal pain are discussed in
Chapter 71
 
(Abdomen).
BELCHING
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
 
; 
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Belching with loud sound, irritability, epigastric and hypochondrial
distension and pain, a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium,
sour regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing,
weak limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides
in severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), Pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
1691
Stomach-Heat
Belching with loud sound, sour regurgitation, burning epigastric
pain, thirst, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat,
Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food 
Belching with loud sound, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea,
fullness, pain and distension of the epigastrium which are relieved
by vomiting, vomiting of sour fluids, insomnia, loose stools or
constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery
pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Belching with weak sound, slight nausea, vomiting of thin watery
fluids, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense
of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach deficient and cold
Belching with weak sound, vomiting of clear fluid, discomfort or
dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and with pressure
or massage, lack of appetite, preference for warm drinks and
foods, absence of thirst, cold and weak limbs, tiredness, pale
complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Belching with weak sound, no appetite or slight hunger but no
desire to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning
epigastric pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
thirst but no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips,
slight feeling of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue
without coating or without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty
pulse.
REGURGITATION
1692
Sour Regurgitation
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
 
; 
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Sour regurgitation, a feeling of burning in the stomach coming in
bouts, belching, irritability, epigastric/hypochondrial distension
and pain, a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sour
regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak
limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Retention of food
Sour regurgitation, vomiting of sour fluids, belching, fullness, pain
and distension of the epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting,
nausea, foul breath, insomnia, loose stools or constipation, poor
appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Sour regurgitation, nausea, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or
thick sticky nasal discharge, thirst without a desire to drink, a
feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, a sticky taste, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach
Sour regurgitation, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, feeling cold, cold limbs, sticky white tongue
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Regurgitation Of Food
‘Regurgitation of food’, called 
fan wei
 
in Chinese (meaning
‘stomach reflux’), is characterized by food entering the stomach,
not being digested and being regurgitated; this is different to
vomiting. Regurgitation of food can take different forms:
sometimes the food eaten in the morning may be regurgitated;
1693
sometimes the food eaten the previous evening may be
regurgitated in the morning; sometimes the food may be
regurgitated 1 or 2 hours after eating; sometimes there may be
regurgitation only at night.
Cold in the Stomach
Regurgitation of thin watery fluids, nausea, hiccup, epigastric pain
aggravated by cold liquids and alleviated by warm liquids,
dribbling from the mouth, feeling worse after swallowing cold
fluids (which are quickly vomited), severe pain in the epigastrium,
a feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth and for warm
liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and Phlegm in the Stomach
Regurgitation of food and phlegm, belching, nausea, vomiting,
hiccup, epigastric pain and distension, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, irritability, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Regurgitation of food, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without desire to drink,
nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stasis of Blood in the Stomach
Regurgitation of food and occasionally blood, nausea, vomiting,
possibly vomiting of blood, vomiting of food looking like coffee
grounds, severe, stabbing epigastric pain that may be worse at
night, dislike of pressure, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Retention of food
Regurgitation of food, sour regurgitation, sticky taste, nausea,
fullness and pain of the epigastrium, restless sleep, thick sticky
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Blood dryness
1694
Sour regurgitation, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to
eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric
pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but
no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, a slight feeling
of fullness after eating, insomnia, dry skin, dull complexion,
normal-coloured tongue without coating or without coating in the
centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Yin of the Stomach
Slight regurgitation of food, no appetite or slight hunger but no
desire to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning
epigastric pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
thirst but no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips,
slight feeling of fullness after eating, loose stools, tiredness
especially in the morning, weak limbs, Pale tongue without coating
in the centre, Empty pulse or Floating-Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Minister Fire
Regurgitation of thin watery fluids, lower backache, cold knees, a
feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
lack of libido, infertility, sterility, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
HICCUP
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Cold in the Stomach
Forceful hiccup, nausea, feeling worse after swallowing cold fluids
(which are quickly vomited), severe pain in the epigastrium, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth, vomiting of
clear fluids (which may alleviate the pain), preference for warm
liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Forceful hiccup, sour regurgitation, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
1695
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Weak, infrequent hiccup with low sound, an uncomfortable feeling
in the epigastrium, no appetite, lack of sense of taste, loose stools,
tiredness especially in the morning, weak limbs, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Weak hiccup, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat,
constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain,
dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but no
desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, slight feeling of
fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or
without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Pronounced hiccup, sour regurgitation, a feeling of burning in the
stomach coming in bouts, belching, irritability,
epigastric/hypochondrial distension and pain, a feeling of
oppression of the epigastrium, sour regurgitation, hiccup,
belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak limbs, normal-coloured
tongue (or slightly red on the sides in severe cases of Liver-Qi
stagnation), Pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Incessant hiccup, lower backache, cold and weak knees, feeling
cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
HUNGER AND EATING
1696
Poor Appetite
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Poor appetite is an important symptom in Chinese medicine
frequently reported by Chinese patients; this is partially a
culturally determined symptom given the history of frequent
famines in China. Western patients seldom report this symptom
spontaneously and we must therefore remember to ask always
about appetite. In China, poor appetite is often a symptom of
sadness and unhappiness; in contrast, Westerners tend to eat 
more
when they are unhappy or depressed.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
Poor appetite, dull epigastric pain that is alleviated by warm
liquids and aggravated by cold liquids, vomiting of thin watery
fluids, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste,
cold limbs, a feeling of cold, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Poor appetite, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down,
early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Poor appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat, constipation
(dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain, dry mouth
1697
and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but no desire to drink,
or a desire to drink in small sips, slight feeling of fullness after
eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or without coating
in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
Poor appetite, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky-white tongue
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Poor appetite, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and
lower abdomen, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to
drink, nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat,
dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Poor appetite, irritability, epigastric/hypochondrial distension and
pain, a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sour
regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak
limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), Pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Phlegm obstructing the Stomach
Poor appetite, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of oppression of the
epigastrium, sputum in the throat, sticky taste, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Food poisoning
Poor appetite, vomiting, sour regurgitation, epigastric fullness and
pain, thick tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Excessive Hunger
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
1698
Stomach-Heat
Excessive hunger, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Excessive hunger, bleeding gums, nausea, vomiting soon after
eating, foul breath, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, burning epigastric pain, mental restlessness, mouth
ulcers, dry stools, sour regurgitation, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Excessive hunger but no desire to eat, dull or burning epigastric
pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, constipation (dry stools),
dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, a slight feeling of fullness after
eating, night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue
(or Red in centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Aversion To Food
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
‘Aversion to food’ is different from ‘poor appetite’ as it implies
not only no desire to eat, but also being disgusted at the sight and
smell of food.
Food poisoning
Strong, acute aversion to food, nausea, especially at the smell of
food, vomiting, diarrhoea with foul smell, sticky taste, epigastric
pain, thick, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Retention of food 
Chronic aversion to food, nausea, especially at the smell of food,
sour regurgitation, sticky taste, fullness and pain of the
epigastrium, restless sleep, thick sticky tongue coating, Slippery
1699
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver, Gall-Bladder, Stomach and
Spleen
Chronic aversion to food, nausea, especially at the smell of food,
sticky taste, thirst, hypochondrial and epigastric fullness,
irritability, a feeling of heaviness, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel in pregnancy
Aversion to food during pregnancy, nausea, especially at the smell
of food, a feeling of energy rising to the chest, restlessness, anxiety,
a feeling of tightness of the chest, Firm pulse.
Hunger With No Desire To Eat
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Hunger with no desire to eat, a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium/abdomen, epigastric/abdominal pain, sticky taste, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, thirst without a desire to drink,
nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive odour, a feeling of
heat, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the head, bitter taste,
Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
‘Stomach strong – Spleen weak’
Hunger with no desire to eat, thirst, burning epigastric pain, loose
stools, tiredness.
This condition is characterized by the Full Stomach pattern
(usually Heat), which causes the hunger, and an Empty Spleen
pattern, which removes the desire to eat.
Gnawing Hunger
‘Gnawing hunger’ is a translation of the Chinese term 
cao za
 
,
which literally means ‘noisy’, but the symptoms of this condition
1700
do not actually involve a gurgling noise. Chinese books usually
explain that this condition is characterized by an uncomfortable
sensation of the epigastrium that mimics pain but is not actually
pain and mimics hunger but is not actually hunger; it also includes
a vexed sensation felt in the epigastrium and a feeling of stuffiness
of the epigastrium. This condition may also be accompanied by
belching and sour regurgitation.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Gnawing hunger, sour regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea,
vomiting, irritability, epigastric and hypochondrial distension and
pain, a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sighing, weak
limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), Pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Stomach-Heat
Gnawing hunger, sour regurgitation, nausea, foul breath, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Cold in the Stomach
Gnawing hunger, nausea, vomiting of thin watery fluids, hiccup,
epigastric pain aggravated cold liquids and alleviated by warm
liquids, dribbling from the mouth, feeling worse after swallowing
cold fluids (which are quickly vomited), severe pain in the
epigastrium, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth
and for warm liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow
pulse.
Food poisoning
Gnawing hunger, belching, nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain and
fullness that is relieved by vomiting, thick tongue coating, Slippery
pulse.
Spleen-Yin deficiency
Slight gnawing hunger, poor appetite, poor digestion, retching,
1701
loss of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth, dry lips, dry stools,
thin body, sallow complexion with possibly a red tip of the nose,
tongue with transverse cracks on the sides, Weak or Floating-
Empty pulse.
Case history 69.1
 
illustrates a pattern causing gnawing hunger.
 
Case History 69.1
A 50-year-old woman complained of a ‘bad’ taste in her
mouth (this was the first symptom she reported), a
feeling of nausea, having either a poor appetite or being
always hungry, and a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium for the past 20 years. When questioned
further, she said ‘I feel sick when I eat but also when I
am hungry; I always want to eat in the late evening.’ She
also complained of abdominal distension and
alternation of constipation and diarrhoea. She also felt
tired, could not concentrate well and suffered from
poor memory. Mentally, she felt depressed and often
weepy. Her tongue was Purple and her pulse was Wiry.
This is a good example of a case of 
cao za
 
(i.e.
‘gnawing hunger’ as described above) deriving from
Liver-Qi stagnation. The characteristic symptom is that
of ‘feeling sick when she eats but also when she is
hungry’; this corresponds to the description of this
condition in Chinese books when they say that the
condition 
mimics hunger but is not hunger
 
.
Craving For Sweets/Constant Picking
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Craving for sweets when tired, constant picking, tendency to
obesity, sweet taste, loss of taste, irregular appetite, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
1702
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Craving for sweets when upset, constant picking, irregular
appetite, sadness, depression, loneliness, palpitations, dizziness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, a
tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale
and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Fire
Craving for sweets when worried, constant picking, hunger,
irregular appetite, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Craving for sweets which is worse premenstrually, constant
picking, irregular appetite, alternation of constipation and
diarrhoea, epigastric/abdominal distension, irritability, moodiness,
depression, tiredness, pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on the
right.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Craving for sweets when tired, constant picking, ir-regular
appetite, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, loose
stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie
down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Spleen-Heat
Craving for sweets, constant picking, hunger, burning
epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the nose,
dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat, scanty
dark urine, yellow complexion, Red tongue with dry yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1703
SLEEPINESS AFTER EATING
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Sleepiness after eating, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Spleen
Sleepiness after eating, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of
the head, a feeling of oppression or fullness of the chest and
epigastrium, dizziness, blurred vision, somnolence, nausea,
sputum in the throat, muzziness of the head, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Sleepiness after eating, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, a
sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested food in the stools, nausea,
dull frontal headache, excessive vaginal discharge, Pale tongue
with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
NAUSEA, RETCHING AND VOMITING
There are several Chinese terms referring to nausea and vomiting,
expressing varying characteristics or degrees of severity. The
Chinese term 
e xin
 
means ‘nausea’, 
ou
 
means vomiting with a
sound, 
tu
 
means vomiting without sound; 
gan ou
 
indicates short
retching with a low sound and 
yue
 
indicates long retching with a
loud sound (before the Ming dynasty this term indicated ‘hiccup’).
The two Chinese terms 
ou
 
and 
tu
 
are usually used together to
indicate vomiting.
Nausea
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
1704
Nausea, vomiting, belching, hiccup, irritability, epigastric and
hypochondrial distension and pain, a feeling of oppression of the
epigastrium, sour regurgitation, sighing, weak limbs, normal-
coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in severe cases of
Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Very slight nausea especially in the morning, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, no appetite, lack of sense of taste, loose
stools, tiredness especially in the morning, weak limbs, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Cold in the Stomach
Nausea, epigastric pain aggravated by cold liquids and alleviated
by warm liquids, vomiting of thin watery fluid, dribbling from the
mouth, hiccup, nausea, feeling worse after swallowing cold fluids
(which are quickly vomited), severe pain in the epigastrium, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth, preference for
warm liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Nausea, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation,
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Slight nausea, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat,
constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain,
dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but no
desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, a slight feeling of
fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or
without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the Stomach
Nausea, vomiting, poor appetite, a feeling of oppression of the
epigastrium, sputum in the throat, sticky taste, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
1705
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach
Nausea, poor appetite, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of
the head and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky white
tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Food poisoning
Nausea aggravated by the smell of food, vomiting, epigastric
fullness and pain alleviated by vomiting, thick tongue coating,
Slippery pulse.
Heart-Qi stagnation
Nausea that is aggravated by emotional stress, palpitations, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, depression, a slight feeling of a
lump in the throat, slight shortness of breath, sighing, poor
appetite, chest and epigastric distension, a dislike of lying down,
weak and cold limbs, slightly purple lips, pale complexion, 
tongue
slightly Pale-Purple on the sides in the chest area, pulse Empty but
very slightly Overflowing on the left Front position.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember: nausea is not always due to Stomach-Qi
not descending. It may also be due to Heart-Qi not
descending (from emotional stress).
Vomiting
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
 
; 
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Vomiting with loud sound, nausea, belching, hiccup, irritability,
epigastric and hypochondrial distension and pain, a feeling of
oppression of the epigastrium, sour regurgitation, sighing, weak
limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
1706
Cold in the Stomach
Vomiting of thin watery fluids with low sound, dribbling from the
mouth, hiccup, nausea, epigastric pain aggravated by cold liquids
and alleviated by warm liquids, feeling worse after swallowing cold
fluids which are quickly vomited, severe pain in the epigastrium, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth and for warm
liquids, thick-white tongue coating, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Vomiting with loud sound soon after eating, belching, sour
regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Vomiting with low sound, an uncomfortable feeling in the
epigastrium, no appetite, lack of sense of taste, loose stools,
tiredness especially in the morning weak limbs, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Stomach deficient and cold
Vomiting with low sound or vomiting of clear fluids, discomfort or
dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and with pressure
or massage, no appetite, preference for warm drinks and foods, no
thirst, cold and weak limbs, tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Vomiting of thin fluids with low sound, no appetite or slight
hunger but no desire to eat, constipation (dry stools), dull or
slightly burning epigastric pain, dry mouth and throat especially
in the afternoon, thirst but no desire to drink, or a desire to drink
in small sips, a slight feeling of fullness after eating, normal-
coloured tongue without coating or without coating in the centre,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
1707
Vomiting of bitter fluids, headache, thirst, dizziness, tinnitus,
bitter taste, dry throat, irritability, red face and ears, hypochondrial
fullness, unilateral or bilateral yellow tongue coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Stomach- and Liver-Fire
Vomiting, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, burning
epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids,
mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry
stools, a feeling of heat, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
External Cold invading the Stomach
Sudden vomiting, epigastric pain aggravated by cold liquids and
alleviated by warm liquids, vomiting of thin watery fluid, dribbling
from the mouth, hiccup, nausea, feeling worse after swallowing
cold fluids (which are quickly vomited), severe pain in the
epigastrium, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth,
preference for warm liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-
Tight-Slow pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the Stomach
Vomiting, nausea, poor appetite, feeling of oppression of the
epigastrium, sputum in the throat, sticky taste, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach
Vomiting, nausea, poor appetite, epigastric fullness, a feeling of
heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of 
cold, cold limbs, sticky
white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Retention of food
Vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching,
nausea, fullness, pain and distension of the epigastrium which are
relieved by vomiting, insomnia, loose stools or constipation, poor
1708
appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
Food poisoning
Vomiting, epigastric fullness and pain that is relieved by vomiting,
sour regurgitation, belching, nausea at the smell of food, thick
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Retching
Retching indicates the attempt and the sound of vomiting but
without bringing up food. In Chinese it is called 
gan ou
 
, indicating
short retching with a low sound, or 
yue
 
, indicating long retching
with a loud sound.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Retching with a loud sound coming in bouts according to the
emotional state, irritability, epigastric and hypochondrial
distension, pulse Wiry on both Middle positions.
Stomach-Heat
Retching with a loud sound, sour regurgitation, nausea, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Cold in the Stomach
Retching with a low sound, vomiting of thin watery fluids, hiccup,
nausea, epigastric pain aggravated by cold liquids and alleviated
by warm liquids, dribbling from the mouth, feeling worse after
swallowing cold fluids (which are quickly vomited), severe pain in
the epigastrium, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for
warmth and for warm liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-
Tight-Slow pulse.
Retention of food
Retching with a loud sound, nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, sour
regurgitation, foul breath, belching, fullness, pain and distension
of the epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting, insomnia, loose
1709
stools or constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-
Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Yin deficiency
Slight retching with a low sound, poor appetite, poor digestion,
gnawing hunger, loss of sense of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry
mouth, dry lips, dry stools, thin body, sallow complexion with
possibly red tip of the nose, tongue with transverse cracks on the
sides, Weak or Floating-Empty pulse.
Vomiting Of Blood
Stomach-Fire
Vomiting of food with bright-red or dark-red blood, sour
regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, burning epigastric pain, intense
thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids, mental restlessness, dry
mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding gums, dry stools, a feeling of heat,
tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Fire invading the Stomach
Vomiting of bright-red blood, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, epigastric and hypochondrial pain,
insomnia, Red tongue with redder sides and yellow coating, Rapid-
Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Vomiting of very dark blood which may look like coffee grounds,
severe, stabbing epigastric pain that may be worse at night, dislike
of pressure, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Vomiting of fresh red blood, feeling of hunger but no desire to eat,
bleeding gums, dull or burning epigastric pain, feeling of heat in
the afternoon, constipation (dry stools), dry mouth and throat
especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in small
1710
sips, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue (or Red centre
only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Vomiting of bright red blood in small quantities, dull epigastric
pain alleviated by pressure, poor appetite, 
slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of
the limbs, loose stools, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, spontaneous sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Vomiting of fresh red blood in small amounts, lingering chronic
disease, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, loose
stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie
down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Difficulty In Swallowing (Diaphragm
Choking)
‘Diaphragm choking’ is a translation of the Chinese term 
ye ge
 
: 
ye
means ‘choking’ and 
ge
 
literally means ‘diaphragm’ and, in this
context, it indicates severe difficulty in swallowing. In fact, 
ye
 
by
itself indicates a mild degree of this condition while 
ge
 
indicates a
severe degree; one could also say that 
ye
 
is the beginning stage of a
condition later developing into 
ge
 
. This condition is characterized
by a difficulty in swallowing, a feeling of obstruction in the
oesophagus and diaphragm and a feeling that the food cannot go
down; it usually affects the elderly (especially men) and it is rare in
young people.
The condition of ‘diaphragm choking’ (
ye ge
 
) should be
differentiated from ‘regurgitation of food’ (
fan wei
 
): ‘Diaphragm
choking’ is centred in the oesophagus and therefore above the
neck of the stomach and it indicates that the food cannot enter the
1711
stomach, causing a difficulty in swallowing and a feeling of
obstruction; ‘regurgitation of food’ is centred in the stomach itself
and indicates that the food is regurgitated some hours after
entering the stomach.
‘Diaphragm choking’ should also be differentiated from the
‘Plum Stone Syndrome’, which is characterized by a feeling of
obstruction in the throat without any actual regurgitation of food.
‘Diaphragm choking’ often corresponds to the Western
condition of hiatus hernia or, in more serious cases, to carcinoma
of the oesophagus.
Stagnation of Qi and Phlegm
Difficulty in swallowing when tense, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Difficulty in swallowing, severe, stabbing epigastric pain that may
be worse at night, dislike of pressure, nausea, vomiting, possibly
of blood, vomiting of food looking like coffee grounds, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Qi and Yang deficiency of the Stomach
Slight difficulty in swallowing, vomiting of thin watery fluids,
discomfort or dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and
with pressure or massage, lack of appetite, preference for warm
drinks and foods, absence of thirst, cold and weak limbs,
tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow
pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Slight difficulty in swallowing, no appetite or slight hunger but no
desire to eat, thirst but no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in
small sips, constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning
epigastric pain, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
slight feeling of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue
1712
without coating or without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic, slight difficulty in swallowing, lower backache, cold and
weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence,
decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension, a desire to lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
TASTE
Bitter Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
A ‘bitter’ taste is a symptom that is very frequently reported by
Chinese patients and, in Chinese culture, this symptom is very
closely identified with emotional problems also because the word
‘bitter’ in Chinese is often used in that sense. In fact, when a
Chinese patient complains of bitter taste, it almost always
indicates emotional problems or serious life difficulties. In 
the
West there is no such correlation between this particular symptom
and emotional problems.
Liver-Fire
Bitter taste throughout the day, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Bitter taste in the morning especially after a bad night’s sleep,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1713
The difference between the bitter taste caused by Liver-Fire and
that caused by Heart-Fire is that the former persists throughout
the day, whereas the latter is experienced only in the morning after
a bad night’s sleep.
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
Bitter and sticky taste, fullness/pain of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or epigastrium, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching,
mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on urination, dark urine, yellow
complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red tongue with redder sides and
unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Lesser-Yang pattern
Bitter taste, alternation of aversion to cold and a feeling of heat,
headache, irritability, blurred vision, dry throat, hypochondrial
pain, tongue with unilateral coating, Wiry pulse.
This is the Lesser-Yang pattern within the identification of
patterns according to the Six Stages.
Sweet Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Deficiency of Qi/Yin of the Stomach and Spleen
Sweet taste, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
lack of taste sensation, dry mouth, night sweating.
The tongue and pulse presentation depends on whether Qi or
Yin deficiency predominates.
Damp-Heat in the Spleen
Sweet or sticky taste, a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium/abdomen, epigastric/abdominal pain, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, thirst without a desire to drink,
1714
nausea, vomiting, loose stools with an offensive odour, a feeling of
heat, scanty dark urine, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the
head, dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Heat
Sweet taste, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation,
nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, red tip of
the nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, dry stools, scanty dark urine, Red
tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Salty Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
The salty taste is not very common in practice and very few
patients will ever complain of this particular symptom.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Salty taste, dry throat and mouth with a desire to drink in small
sips, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Salty taste, lower backache, cold knees, feeling cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Sour Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Liver-Fire
A sour (or bitter) taste, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, constipation,
1715
dark urine, Red tongue with 
redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Sour taste, sour regurgitation, belching, epigastric fullness and
distension, poor appetite, tiredness, alternation of constipation
and diarrhoea, pulse Weak on the right and Wiry on the left.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Sour taste, sour regurgitation, irritability, epigastric and
hypochondrial distension and pain, a feeling of oppression of the
epigastrium, sour regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea,
vomiting, sighing, weak limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly
Red on the sides in severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry
on the left and Weak on the right.
Retention of food
Sour taste, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, fullness, pain
and distension of the epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting,
nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, insomnia, loose stools or
constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery
pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Sour taste, thirst, epigastric pain, sour regurgitation, nausea,
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Sticky Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Western patients often describe the sticky taste as a ‘metallic’
taste.
Cold-Dampness
Sticky taste, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky white tongue coating,
1716
Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat
Sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, epigastric fullness, a
feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of heat, sticky
yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm
Sticky taste, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, barking cough with
profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Loss Of Taste
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 30
Deficiency of Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
Gradual loss of sense of taste and possibly smell, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Dampness obstructing the Middle Burner
Loss of sense of taste, abdominal fullness and distension, poor
appetite, no desire to drink, sleepiness after eating, thick sticky
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Phlegm obstructing the Spleen
Loss of sense of taste, epigastric and abdominal fullness, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, poor appetite, nausea, tiredness, feeling
of heaviness, sputum in the throat, loose stools, sleepiness after
1717
eating, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Cold in the
Stomach
Loss of sense of taste, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, loose stools,
discomfort or dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and
with pressure or massage, preference for warm drinks and foods,
vomiting of clear fluids, absence of thirst, cold and weak limbs,
Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Foul Breath
Stomach-Heat
Foul breath, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger,
foul breath, burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat, Red tongue
with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Foul breath, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, barking
cough with profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of
breath, wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of
heat, insomnia, a feeling of agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with
a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food
Foul breath, sour taste, belching, sour regurgitation, nausea,
vomiting of sour fluids, fullness, pain and distension of the
epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting, insomnia, loose stools
or constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery
pulse.
1718
CHAPTER 70
 
THIRST AND
DRINK
CHAPTER CONTENTS
THIRST
DRY MOUTH
ABSENCE OF THIRST
INCREASED SALIVATION
THIRST
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 32
Stomach-Heat
Thirst with a desire to drink cold fluids, foul breath, sour
regurgitation, burning epigastric pain, nausea, excessive hunger, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Thirst, bitter taste, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation, dark
1719
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, palpitations, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Thirst with no desire to drink, sticky taste, a feeling of fullness and
pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness, nausea, loose stools with offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
Thirst, bitter taste, fullness/pain of the hypochondrium, abdomen
or epigastrium, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle
bleeding/pain, burning on urination, dark urine, yellow
complexion 
and eyes, vomiting, Red tongue with redder sides and
unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Thirst without desire to drink, barking cough with profuse, sticky
yellow or green sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, insomnia, a feeling of
agitation, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Thirst with desire to slip fluids that is more pronounced in the
evening, dry mouth and throat, palpitations, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, propensity to be startled,
mental restlessness, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush,
1720
night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue that is redder on the
tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Thirst with a desire to drink in small sips that is more pronounced
in the evening, dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon,
dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon,
constipation (dry stools), a feeling of hunger but no desire to eat, a
slight feeling of fullness after eating, night sweating, five-palm
heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red centre only) without
coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Thirst with a desire to drink cold water, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of the nostrils,
red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips that is more
pronounced in the evening, dry mouth and throat at night, dry
cough or with scanty, sticky sputum which could be blood tinged,
weak/hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, a feeling
of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm heat, thin
body or thin chest, insomnia, anxiety, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid tongue.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dry mouth and
throat, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, a tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or with rootless
coating, Floating-Empty pulse, especially on the left Front position.
Liver-Yin deficiency
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dry cough, weak
1721
voice, dry throat, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine,
tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dry cough, weak
voice, dry throat, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Slight thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, dry mouth, dull
epigastric pain, poor appetite, tongue of a normal colour without
coating in the centre.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
It is often difficult to establish whether a patient
suffers from excessive ‘thirst’ owing to the widespread
habit of forcing oneself to drink large amounts of water.
DRY MOUTH
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 32
Yin deficiency
Dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, dry throat in the
evening, night sweating, scanty dark urine, dry stools, normal-
coloured tongue without 
coating, Floating-Empty pulse. Other
symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which could
be the Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Kidneys, Heart, or Spleen.
1722
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Dry mouth with no desire to drink, thirst without a desire to drink,
a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower
abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness, nausea, loose
stools with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach
Dry mouth with no desire to drink, thirst, foul breath, burning
epigastric pain, mental restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools,
mouth ulcers, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after
eating, excessive hunger, a feeling of heat, a feeling of oppression
of the chest and epigastrium, insomnia, tongue Red in the centre
with a sticky yellow coating and a Stomach crack with a rough,
sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
ABSENCE OF THIRST
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 32
Deficiency of Yang of the Spleen and Stomach
Absence of thirst, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
feeling cold, cold limbs, oedema. Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Cold in the Stomach
Absence of thirst, severe pain in the epigastrium, a feeling of cold,
cold limbs, preference for warmth, vomiting of clear fluids (which
may alleviate the pain), nausea, feeling worse after swallowing cold
fluids (which are quickly vomited), thick white tongue coating,
Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
1723
Lack of desire to drink, sticky taste, a feeling of fullness and pain
of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, nausea, loose stools, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow
complexion, tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember always to ask about ‘absence of thirst’: no
patient will report that spontaneously. This is also often
difficult to establish owing to the widespread habit of
drinking vast amounts of water.
INCREASED SALIVATION
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
Increased salivation, preference for warm drinks and foods,
discomfort or dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and
with pressure or massage, no appetite, vomiting of clear fluid, no
thirst, cold and weak limbs, tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency, Water overflowing 
Increased salivation, oedema especially of the legs and ankles, a
feeling of cold generally or in the legs and back, fullness and
distension of abdomen, soreness of the lower back, scanty clear
urination, palpitations, breathlessness, cold hands, Pale and
Swollen tongue with a wet white coating, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
1724
CHAPTER 71
 
ABDOMEN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
PAIN
Area below the xyphoid process
Epigastric pain
Hypochondrial pain
Umbilical pain
Central-lower abdominal pain
Lateral-lower abdominal pain
DISTENSION AND FULLNESS
Abdominal distension
Abdominal fullness
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE ABDOMEN
Feeling of cold in the abdomen
Feeling of pulsation under the umbilicus
Feeling of energy rising in the abdomen
BORBORYGMI
FLATULENCE
1725
SKIN SIGNS
Distended abdominal veins
Lines
Maculae
ABDOMINAL MASSES
Small hypochondrial lumps
Lumps in the epigastrium
OEDEMA OF THE ABDOMEN
ABDOMINAL SIZE
Thin abdomen
Large abdomen
SAGGING LOWER ABDOMEN
UMBILICUS
Protruding umbilicus
Sunken umbilicus
INTRODUCTION
Although the headings below refer primarily to pain in various
areas of the abdomen, other sensations may be experienced in
each of those areas; these are primarily distension, oppression,
fullness or stuffiness.
The clinical significance of these sensations is briefly explained
below. For a fuller explanation, see 
Part 2
 
, 
Chapter 38
 
.
Distension
A feeling of abdominal distension (usually called ‘bloating’ in
English) may indicate the following patterns:
 
• 
 
Qi stagnation – severe distension
• 
 
Spleen-Qi deficiency – mild distension
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm.
1726
Besides the subjective feeling of bloating, distension is also
characterized by an objective, distended, drum-like feeling on
palpation.
Oppression
A feeling of oppression (called 
men
 
in Chinese) usually indicates
Phlegm, but it may also indicate severe Qi stagnation. The feeling
of oppression is purely subjective.
Fullness
A feeling of fullness in the abdomen is usually caused by
Dampness or retention of food. Subjectively the patient feels full
as if having had a large meal and there is a very slight feeling of
nausea; objectively the abdomen feels hard on palpation.
Stuffiness
‘Stuffiness’ is a translation of the Chinese term 
pi
 
(although this
term has a broader meaning than simply ‘feeling of stuffiness’). A
feeling of stuffiness in the abdomen is characterized by a
subjective mild feeling of fullness, together with an objective soft
feeling of the abdomen on palpation. This symptom is usually due
either to Dampness or Heat occurring against a background of
Deficiency.
PAIN
The regions of abdominal pain in Chinese medicine are as follows:
 
• 
 
area under the heart (this is the small area
immediately below the xyphoid process extending
approximately 2 inches and bordered by the ribs)
• 
 
epigastric (this is the area between the xyphoid
process and the umbilicus but excluding the
hypochondrial area)
• 
 
hypochondrial (these are the two areas below the rib
cage)
• 
 
umbilical (this is the area around the umbilicus)
• 
 
central-lower abdominal (this is the central area of the
1727
abdomen between the umbilicus and the symphysis
pubis)
• 
 
lateral-lower abdominal (these are the lateral areas of
the lower abdomen).
Figure 16.7 on p. 145
 
illustrates these areas.
Area Below The Xyphoid Process
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
Rebellious Qi of the Penetrating Vessel
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of tightness, a
feeling of heat in the face, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
palpitations, anxiety, a feeling of tightness of the chest, nausea,
slight breathlessness, epigastric fullness or stuffiness, umbilical
and abdominal fullness, irregular/painful periods, a feeling of
energy rising in the abdomen to the chest, Firm pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Pain below the xyphoid process, burning epigastric pain, thirst,
sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Stomach-Qi stagnation
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of distension,
epigastric pain and distension, belching, nausea, vomiting, hiccup,
irritability, pulse Wiry on the right Middle position.
Heart-Qi stagnation
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of distension,
palpitations, a feeling of oppression of the chest, depression, a
slight feeling of a lump in the throat, slight shortness of breath,
sighing, poor appetite, chest and epigastric distension, a dislike of
1728
lying down, weak and cold limbs, slightly purple lips, pale
complexion, tongue slightly Pale-Purple on the sides in the chest
area, pulse Empty but very slightly Overflowing on the left Front
position.
Retention of Food in the Stomach
Pain below the xyphoid process with feelings of fullness, fullness,
pain and distension of the epigastrium which are relieved by
vomiting, nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath, sour
regurgitation, belching, insomnia, loose stools or constipation,
poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Heart-Heat
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of stuffiness, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, loss of sense of taste,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
feeling agitated, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm in the Stomach
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of oppression, a
feeling of oppression in the epigastrium or the chest, nausea,
sputum in the throat, nausea, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Qi stagnation and Phlegm
Pain below the xyphoid process with a feeling of oppression and
distension, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of a lump
in the throat, sighing, sputum in the throat, irritability, Swollen
tongue, Wiry or Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, repressed feelings are often ‘stored’
in the area below the xyphoid process; this often
manifests with a hardness in this area on palpation.
1729
Epigastric Pain
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dull epigastric pain that is alleviated by eating and pressure
coming in bouts, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, lack of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Dull epigastric pain, poor appetite, poor digestion, retching,
gnawing hunger, loss of sense of taste, dry mouth, dry lips, dry
stools, thin body, sallow complexion with possibly a red tip of the
nose, night sweating, tongue with transversal cracks on the sides,
Weak or Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Epigastric pain and distension extending to the hypochondrium,
irritability, a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sour
regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak
limbs, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Cold in the Stomach
Severe, sudden-onset, spastic epigastric pain that is alleviated by
drinking warm liquids and aggravated by drinking cold liquids, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, preference for warmth, vomiting of
clear fluids (which may alleviate the pain), nausea, feeling worse
after swallowing cold fluids (which are quickly vomited),
preference for warm liquids, thick white tongue coating, Deep-
Tight-Slow pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea,
1730
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding
gums, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting
soon after eating, a feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red
with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach
Epigastric pain that is aggravated by drinking cold liquids and
ameliorated by drinking warm liquids, poor appetite, a feeling of
fullness or cold in the epigastrium, a feeling of heaviness of the
head and body, a sweetish taste or absence of taste, no thirst, loose
stools, tiredness, lassitude, nausea, oedema, dull-white
complexion, excessive white vaginal discharge, Pale tongue with
sticky white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Epigastric pain, a feeling of fullness of the epigastrium, a feeling of
heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or thick sticky nasal discharge,
thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, a sticky taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Stomach
Severe, stabbing epigastric pain that may be worse at night, a
dislike of pressure, nausea, vomiting, possibly of blood, or food
looking like coffee grounds, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach
Burning epigastric pain, thirst without a desire to drink, mental
restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools, dry mouth, mouth ulcers,
sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest and epigastrium, insomnia, tongue Red in the centre with a
1731
sticky yellow coating and a Stomach crack with a rough, sticky
yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Retention of Food 
Epigastric pain, distension and fullness which are relieved by
vomiting, nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath, sour
regurgitation, belching, insomnia, loose stools or constipation,
poor appetite, thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Fire invading the Stomach 
Burning epigastric pain, distension and fullness, irritability, sour
regurgitation, hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak
limbs, tongue Red on the sides, pulse Wiry-Rapid and Weak on the
right.
Phlegm-Fluids in the Stomach 
Dull epigastric pain, abdominal fullness and distension, nausea,
vomiting of watery fluids, dry mouth without a desire to drink,
shortness of breath, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
swelling of the limbs, expectoration of thin watery sputum,
inability to lie down, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-
Wiry or Deep-Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Liver-Qi invading the Stomach is probably the
commonest cause of epigastric pain.
Hypochondrial Pain
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
These are the two lateral areas of the upper abdomen below the
rib cage.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Hypochondrial pain and distension without a fixed location and
coming and going according to the emotional state, irritability,
1732
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Stabbing hypochondrial pain with fixed location which is worse at
night, painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses
in the abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
Hypochondrial pain distension and fullness, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on
urination, dark urine, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red
tongue with redder sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency
Dull hypochondrial pain that is alleviated by rest, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred vision, floaters
in the eyes, dry eyes, diminished night vision, scanty menstruation
or amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion without lustre but with red
cheekbones, muscular weakness, cramps, withered and brittle
nails, very dry skin and hair, night sweating, depression, a feeling
of aimlessness, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or
Floating-Empty pulse.
Lesser-Yang syndrome
Hypochondrial pain and distension, alternation of chills and a
feeling of heat, bitter taste, dry throat, blurred vision, irritability,
nausea, unilateral sticky tongue coating, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the hypochondrium
Hypochondrial pain that is worse on coughing and breathing, a
feeling of distension and pulling of the hypochondrium, shortness
of breath, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Deep-Slippery-Wiry
pulse.
1733
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Never ask a patient about pain in the
‘hypochondrium’ but instead point to the area you
mean.
Umbilical Pain
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
Pain in the area around the umbilicus is common in children.
Stagnation of Qi in the Stomach and Intestines
Umbilical pain and distension, epigastric pain and distention,
belching, nausea, vomiting, hiccup, irritability, pulse Wiry on the
right Middle position.
Cold in the Intestines
Spastic umbilical pain that is aggravated by cold liquids and
alleviated by hot liquids, diarrhoea with pain, 
feeling of cold, a
cold sensation in abdomen, thick white tongue coating, Deep-Wiry
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Umbilical pain that is not relieved by a bowel movement,
diarrhoea, mucus and blood in stools, offensive odour of stools,
burning in the anus, scanty dark urine, fever, sweating which does
not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat, thirst without a desire to
drink, a feeling of heaviness of the body and limbs, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dull umbilical pain that comes and goes, lower backache, cold and
weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence,
decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, loose stools, poor appetite, a desire to lie down,
early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1734
Food poisoning
Severe umbilical pain, belching, nausea, vomiting, loose stools,
thick tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang
Burning umbilical pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding
gums, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting
soon after eating, a feeling of heat, sour regurgitation, tongue Red
with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds to either the organ pattern of the Bright-Yang
Heat within the identification of patterns according to the Six
Stages or to the pattern of Dry-Heat in the Intestines within the
identification of patterns according to the Four Levels.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Umbilical pain is more common in children than in
adults.
Central-Lower Abdominal Pain
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
In Chinese this area is called 
xiao fu
 
which means ‘small
abdomen’. It is influenced by the channels of the Kidneys, Bladder,
Small Intestine and Directing Vessel.
The symptoms and signs discussed here are only the non-
gynaecological ones. Pain in the central-lower abdominal area may
of course also be due to various pathologies affecting the Uterus
and the Directing Vessel. These are discussed in 
Chapters 84
 
–
89
 
.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Central-lower abdominal pain and fullness, frequency and
difficulty in urination, burning on urination, dark urine, thirst with
no desire to drink, sticky yellow tongue coating on the root,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1735
Stagnation of Qi in the Bladder
Central-lower abdominal pain and distension, a pronounced
feeling of distension in the area immediately over the symphysis
pubis, frequent but scanty urination, Wiry pulse.
Intestines deficient and cold
Dull central-lower abdominal pain that comes and goes and is
alleviated by warm liquids and the application of heat and
aggravated by cold liquids, abdomen cold when touched, cold
limbs, loose stools, pale urine, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Stasis of Blood in the Bladder
Stabbing central-lower abdominal pain, blood in the urine, pain on
urination, Purple tongue, Deep-Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Pain and distension of the central-lower abdominal area, urinary
difficulty, a pronounced feeling of distension before urination,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe pain of the central-lower abdominal area, urinary difficulty,
blood in the urine, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Pain of the central-lower abdominal area, urinary difficulty,
burning on urination, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food and Cold
Pain of the central-lower abdominal area, a pronounced feeling of
distension which is worse after eating and with cold, a feeling of
fullness, abdomen cold to the touch, Deep-Slippery pulse, tongue
with thick sticky coating.
1736
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Pain of the central-lower abdominal area, poor appetite, tiredness,
slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Pain of the central-lower abdominal area, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, dry mouth with a desire to sip water, backache, poor
memory, dark-scanty urine, tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pain of the central-lower abdominal area, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, feeling cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Lateral-Lower Abdominal Pain
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
In Chinese the lateral-lower abdominal areas are called 
shao fu
which means ‘lesser abdomen’. They are under the influence of
the channels of the Liver, Large Intestine and Penetrating Vessel.
As a rule of thumb, when a problem occurs in the right lateral-
lower abdominal area, it is likely to be caused by the
gynaecological system; when it occurs in the left lateral-lower
abdominal area, it is more likely to be the result of a Large
Intestine pathology. However, this is only a broad rule and subject
to exceptions.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Lateral-lower abdominal pain and distension, pain coming and
going according to emotional mood, irritability, moodiness,
constipation with small stools, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Large Intestine
Lateral-lower abdominal pain, loose stools with mucus and blood,
1737
a feeling of heaviness, thirst with no desire to drink, burning in the
anus, tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Large Intestine
Lateral-lower abdominal pain, loose stools with mucus, a feeling of
heaviness, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Stabbing lateral-lower abdominal pain, a feeling of abdominal
mass, hypochondrial pain, painful periods, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Large Intestine deficient and cold
Dull lateral-lower abdominal pain that comes and goes and is
better with rest, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, pale
complexion, tiredness, abdomen cold to the touch, Pale tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Girdle Vessel pain 
Lateral-lower abdominal pain radiating to the back, or backache
radiating to the lateral-lower abdominal area, Wiry pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood in the Penetrating
Vessel 
Lateral-lower abdominal pain, a feeling of fullness in the abdomen
and umbilical region, a feeling of tightness of the chest,
palpitations, anxiety, painful periods, a feeling of lump in the
throat, a feeling of heat in the face, Purple tongue, Firm pulse.
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
Lateral-lower abdominal pain radiating to the testis or vagina,
contraction of the scrotum or vagina, pain alleviated by the
application of heat, pale complexion, cold hands and feet, white
tongue coating, Deep-Wiry-Slow pulse.
1738
DISTENSION AND FULLNESS
Abdominal Distension
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
‘Distension’ (in Chinese called 
zhang
 
) is a word frequently used
by Chinese patients; Western patients will seldom use this word
and in Anglo-Saxon countries they might say ‘bloating’ or
‘bursting’ to express this symptom. Distension is a subjective
feeling of the patient but also an objective sign, that is, the
abdomen feels distended and hard like a drum on palpation.
Distension is the classic symptom of Qi stagnation; indeed, if
there is a feeling of distension there is Qi stagnation. However, a
feeling of distension may also be associated with Damp-Phlegm
and, in a few cases, with a deficiency of Qi.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Abdominal distension that comes and goes according to emotional
moods, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slight abdominal distension after eating, poor appetite, tiredness,
pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Phlegm obstructing the Spleen
Abdominal distension, a pronounced feeling of distension and
oppression of the chest and epigastrium, sputum in the throat, a
feeling of heaviness, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Slight abdominal and hypochondrial distension, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, dry eyes, dry hair, dry nails, insomnia, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Abdominal distension is one of the most common
1739
symptoms of all. Remember that no patient will use the
word ‘distension’ but usually ‘bloating’.
Abdominal Fullness
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
‘Fullness’ (called 
man
 
in Chinese) indicates a feeling of fullness
in the abdomen or epigastrium; this is different from the feeling of
distension, from both a subjective and an objective point of view.
‘Distension’ indicates a subjective feeling of bloating, while the
abdomen feels distended and hard like a drum on palpation;
‘fullness’ indicates a subjective feeling of fullness and obstruction
similar to what one feels after eating too much. With ‘fullness’, the
abdomen feels hard on palpation but 
not
 
distended like a drum.
A feeling of fullness generally indicates Dampness or retention
of food.
Cold-Dampness in the Intestines
Abdominal fullness, hardness and coldness of the abdomen on
palpation, cold limbs, nausea, vomiting, loose stools, sticky white
tongue coating, Soft-Slow or Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Abdominal fullness, hardness of the abdomen on palpation,
nausea, vomiting, irritability, thirst with no desire to drink, foul-
smelling stools, mucus in stools, dark urine, sticky yellow tongue
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food
Epigastric fullness, epigastrium feels hard on palpation, nausea,
sour regurgitation, belching, thick sticky tongue coating, Slippery
pulse.
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
Slight abdominal fullness that comes and goes, abdomen not too
1740
hard on palpation, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Weak pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang (Organ pattern)
Umbilical fullness and pain, fever, sweating, intense thirst,
constipation, dry stools, Red tongue with dry yellow or brown
coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse. This corresponds to either the
Organ pattern of the Bright-Yang Heat within the identification of
patterns according to the Six Stages or to the pattern of Dry-Heat
in the Intestines within the identification of patterns according to
the Four Levels.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
It is important to explain to patients what we mean by
‘fullness’ and how it differs from ‘distension’.
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE
ABDOMEN
Feeling Of Cold In The Abdomen
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 38
This indicates both a subjective feeling of cold and an objective
feeling of cold of the abdomen on palpation.
Yang deficiency of the Stomach and Spleen
A feeling of cold of the epigastrium and abdomen, dull epigastric
pain, poor appetite, loose stools, tiredness, cold limbs, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
A feeling of cold generally or in the lower abdomen, backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
1741
Directing and Penetrating Vessels deficient and cold 
A feeling of cold in the lower abdomen (centrally in the case of the
Directing Vessel and laterally in the case of the Penetrating Vessel),
irregular periods, painful periods, infertility, excessive white
vaginal discharge, dark rings under the eyes, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
A feeling of cold in the central-lower abdomen extending to the
scrotum, contraction of the scrotum or vagina, cold hands and feet,
white tongue coating, Deep-Wiry pulse.
Feeling Of Pulsation Under The Umbilicus
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel 
A feeling of pulsation under the umbilicus, abdominal distension,
epigastric fullness and discomfort, a feeling of tightness of the
chest, palpitations, anxiety, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a
feeling of heat in the face, Firm pulse.
Kidneys not receiving Qi
A feeling of pulsation under the umbilicus, breathlessness,
wheezing, sighing, sweating, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Phlegm-Fluids in the abdomen
A feeling of pulsation under the umbilicus, abdominal fullness
and distension, vomiting of watery fluids, a feeling of oppression
of the chest, loose stools, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Deep-Wiry pulse.
Feeling Of Energy Rising In The Abdomen
Western patients will seldom report this symptom as such, but it
does occur frequently and must be elicited on interrogation. In
Chinese medicine this symptom occurs in the so-called ‘Running
Piglet’ pattern: the patient feels a sensation of energy rising all the
way from the lower abdomen to the throat as if there were a
1742
running piglet in the abdomen. The most common pathology
causing this symptom is rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel.
Rebellious Qi in the Penetrating Vessel
A feeling of energy rising in the abdomen, abdominal distension
or fullness, epigastric fullness and discomfort, ‘butterflies in the
stomach’, a feeling of tightness of the chest, palpitations, anxiety, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of heat in the face, Firm
pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat rebelling upwards
A feeling of energy rushing up from the abdomen to the throat
and face from the lower abdomen, a feeling of heat in the face,
anxiety, a tendency to be easily startled, a feeling as if one were
going to die, palpitations, abdominal pain, a bitter taste, vomiting,
mental restlessness, a feeling of hot and cold, tongue with red
sides and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Yin-Cold in the abdomen
A feeling of energy rising in the abdomen, abdominal fullness,
distension and pain, vomiting of watery fluids, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
lower backache, Pale and Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Deep-Tight pulse.
BORBORYGMI
‘Borborygmi’ indicates a gurgling sound in the intestines.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Borborygmi that come and go according to emotional moods and
are not relieved after diarrhoea, abdominal distension, alternation
of constipation and diarrhoea, irritability, sighing, pulse Wiry on
the left and Weak on the right.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
1743
Borborygmi, loose stools with foul smell and mucus, burning
sensation in the anus, thirst with no desire to drink, sticky taste,
sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Intestines
Borborygmi, loose stools, a feeling of abdominal fullness, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, nausea, vomiting, mucus in the stools,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight borborygmi, loose stools, backache, dizziness, cold limbs,
tiredness, abundant pale urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
Slight borborygmi, a feeling of cold in abdomen and epigastrium,
loose stools, cold limbs, tiredness, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
FLATULENCE
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Flatulence, slight abdominal distension, loose stools, poor
appetite, tiredness, pale complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Flatulence, hypochondrial and abdominal distension, alternation
of constipation and diarrhoea, irritability, tiredness, poor appetite,
Pale tongue, pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Flatulence, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
1744
SKIN SIGNS
Distended Abdominal Veins
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Stasis of Blood in the Liver and Spleen
Blue veins on abdomen, abdominal pain, hypochondrial pain,
blood in stools, dark complexion, spider naevi on the throat and
chest, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Qi stagnation with Dampness
Blue veins on abdomen, abdominal distension and fullness, a
feeling of heaviness, sticky tongue coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pale-blue veins on abdomen, abdominal distension, oedema, cold
limbs, frequent pale urination, tiredness, weak knees, loose stools,
darkish complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Blue veins on abdomen, dizziness, tinnitus, dry eyes, backache,
night sweating, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Blood-Heat
Red veins on the abdomen, abdomen hot to the touch, a feeling of
heat, skin diseases with red eruptions, dry mouth, bleeding, Red
tongue, Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Cold
Dark blue veins on the abdomen, abdominal pain and distension
worse for cold liquids and better for warmth, tongue with white
coating, Deep-Slow pulse.
Lines
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
1745
Blood stasis deriving from Cold
Blue lines on the abdomen, abdominal pain, blood in the stools
worse with cold liquids and better for warmth, Pale-Purple tongue,
Wiry-Slow pulse.
Blood stasis with Blood-Heat
Purple lines on the abdomen, abdominal pain aggravated by
exposure to heat, blood in the stools, Reddish-purple tongue, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Maculae
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Blood-Heat
Red maculae on the abdomen aggravated by exposure to heat,
blood in the stools, skin eruptions, Red tongue, Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Purple maculae on the abdomen, abdominal pain, abdomen hard
on palpation, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
ABDOMINAL MASSES
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Abdominal masses are called 
Ji Ju. Ji
 
indicates actual abdominal
masses which are fixed and immovable; if there is an associated
pain, its location is fixed. These masses are due to stasis of Blood
and I call them ‘Blood masses’. 
Ju
 
indicates abdominal masses
which come and go, do not have a fixed location and are movable.
If there is an associated pain, it too comes and goes and changes
location. Such masses are due to stagnation of Qi and I call them
‘Qi masses’.
Actual abdominal lumps therefore pertain to the category of
abdominal masses and specifically 
Ji
 
masses (i.e. Blood masses).
Another name for abdominal masses was 
Zheng Jia, Zheng
 
being
equivalent to 
Ji
 
(i.e. fixed masses) and 
Jia
 
being equivalent to 
Ju
1746
(i.e. non-substantial masses from stagnation of Qi). The two terms
Zheng Jia
 
normally referred to abdominal masses occurring only in
women, but although these masses are more frequent in women
they do occur in men as well.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Movable abdominal masses which come and go, abdominal
distension and pain which come and go with the masses,
irritability, depression, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Hard and immovable abdominal masses, abdominal distension
and pain, irritability, painful periods, dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm and retention of food
Masses in the epigastrium or umbilical area, a feeling of fullness,
oppression and pain of the epigastrium, Swollen tongue with thick
coating, Slippery pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Soft masses in the epigastrium or umbilical area, slight abdominal
distension, poor appetite, tiredness, pale complexion, loose stools,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Blood stasis
Abdominal masses, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold,
weak knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Phlegm
Abdominal masses which are relatively soft on palpation, a feeling
of heaviness, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue
with thick sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
1747
Damp-Heat
Abdominal masses, pain, tenderness on palpation, thirst, a feeling
of heat, a feeling of heaviness, tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Small Hypochondrial Lumps
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Liver-Blood stasis
Small, hypochondrial lumps, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain,
painful periods, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Lumps In The Epigastrium
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Damp-Phlegm in the Middle Burner
Lumps in the epigastrium which are soft, epigastric distension, a
feeling of heaviness, poor appetite, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Blood stasis
Lumps in the epigastrium which are hard and immovable,
epigastric pain, vomiting of blood, dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis in the Middle Burner
Lumps in the epigastrium which are hard and immovable,
epigastric distension and pain, vomiting of blood, 
dark
complexion, Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
OEDEMA OF THE ABDOMEN
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Spleen-Yang deficiency
1748
Oedema of the abdomen, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, feeling cold, cold limbs, Pale
and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Oedema of the abdomen and ankles, lower backache, cold knees, a
feeling of cold generally or in the lower back, weak legs, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
or scanty clear urination, urination at night, apathy, loose stools,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
ABDOMINAL SIZE
Thin Abdomen
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Qi and Blood deficiency
Thin abdomen, loose stools, tiredness, weak limbs, Pale tongue,
Weak or Choppy pulse.
Yin deficiency
Thin abdomen, poor appetite, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating,
dry mouth with a desire to sip water, backache, poor memory,
scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Large Abdomen
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Phlegm obstructing the Spleen
Large abdomen, abdominal distension, oppression of the chest,
dizziness, poor appetite, Swollen and Pale tongue, Slippery pulse.
1749
SAGGING LOWER ABDOMEN
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Damp-Phlegm in the Lower Burner
Sagging lower abdomen, swollen and soft abdomen, abdominal
distension, a feeling of heaviness, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Severe Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Sagging lower abdomen, tiredness, lethargy, feeling cold, frequent
clear urination, lower backache, Pale and Wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
UMBILICUS
Protruding Umbilicus
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
Empty-Cold with Qi stagnation
Protruding umbilicus worse with cold liquids, better for warmth,
worse with emotional upsets, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow and
slightly Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis with oedema
Protruding umbilicus, pain around the umbilicus, swollen
abdomen, blood in the stools, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy
pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Protruding umbilicus worse with cold, loose stools, tiredness, Pale
and Wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Sunken Umbilicus
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 16
1750
Blood stasis with Spleen-Qi sinking
Sunken umbilicus, pain around the umbilicus, a feeling of bearing
down, tiredness, blood in the stools, Pale-Purple tongue, Wiry or
Choppy pulse.
Damp-Heat in the abdomen
Sunken umbilicus, umbilical area tender on palpation, abdominal
distension, swollen abdomen, tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1751
CHAPTER 72
 
DEFECATION
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DIARRHOEA OR LOOSE STOOLS
DIARRHOEA WITH VOMITING
CONSTIPATION
ALTERNATION OF CONSTIPATION AND LOOSE STOOLS
INCONTINENCE OF FAECES
BLOOD AND MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
BLOOD IN THE STOOLS
DIFFICULTY IN DEFECATION
STRAINING IN DEFECATION
DIARRHOEA OR LOOSE STOOLS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Loose stools, slight abdominal distension, poor appetite, tiredness,
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
1752
Early-morning diarrhoea, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Loose stools or alternation of loose stools and constipation, stools
sometimes dry and bitty and sometimes loose, flatulence,
irritability, abdominal distension and pain, tiredness, poor
appetite, normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in
severe cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and
Weak on the right.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Loose stools with foul smell and mucus and possibly blood,
offensive odour of stools, burning in the anus, abdominal pain
that is not relieved by a bowel movement, scanty dark urine, fever,
sweating which does not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat, thirst
without a desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the body and
limbs, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Intestines
Loose stools with mucus and without smell, abdominal pain,
abdominal fullness, undigested food in the stools, 
a feeling of
cold, cold limbs, a feeling of heaviness, sticky white tongue
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Chronic loose stools or normal but very frequent stools, urgency, a
dragging-down feeling, tiredness, depression, poor appetite, weak
limbs, Pale tongue with teethmarks, Weak pulse.
Retention of food
Loose stools, fullness, pain and distension of the epigastrium
which are relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting of sour fluids,
foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, insomnia, poor appetite,
1753
thick tongue coating, Full-Slippery pulse.
DIARRHOEA WITH VOMITING
Food poisoning
Violent diarrhoea and vomiting with sudden onset, nausea at the
smell of food, epigastric fullness, sour regurgitation, thick tongue
coating, Slippery pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Stomach and Intestines
Diarrhoea without smell, and vomiting, mucus in the stools,
abdominal pain that is alleviated by application of heat, epigastric
and abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the head and
body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky white tongue coating,
Slippery-Slow pulse.
Stomach and Intestines deficient and cold
Diarrhoea and vomiting of watery fluids, dull abdominal pain,
discomfort or dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating and
with pressure or massage, no appetite, preference for warm drinks
and foods, vomiting of clear fluid, absence of thirst, cold and weak
limbs, tiredness, pale complexion, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak-Slow pulse.
Retention of food 
Diarrhoea with vomiting, fullness, pain and distension of the
epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting of
sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, insomnia,
loose stools or constipation, poor appetite, thick tongue coating,
Full-Slippery pulse.
Invasion of Summer-Heat
Sudden diarrhoea and vomiting, epigastric pain, sour
regurgitation, aversion to cold, fever, thirst, irritability, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, headache, cold hands and feet, dark urine,
Floating-Rapid pulse.
1754
CONSTIPATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
The term ‘constipation’ is used to describe the slow movement
of unduly firm contents through the large bowel leading to
infrequent passing of small hard stools. Thus, constipation may
indicate several different symptoms, among which are:
 
• 
 
bowel movements which do not occur daily
• 
 
dry stools
• 
 
difficult defecation
• 
 
abnormal shape of stools.
Views on what constitutes a normal frequency of bowel
movement vary widely. From the point of view of Chinese medicine
the bowel movement should occur at least once a day. This view
runs counter to the Western medical view, according to which the
frequency of bowel movement is not that important so long so
they occur regularly.
Heat in the Intestines
Constipation with dry stools, burning sensation in the mouth, dry
tongue, burning and swelling in anus, scanty dark urine, thick, dry
yellow (or brown or black) tongue coating, Full-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Constipation with dry stools, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter
taste, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow
coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang (organ syndrome)
Constipation with dry stools, abdominal pain and fullness, fever,
burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, mental restlessness, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, bleeding
gums, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea, vomiting soon after
1755
eating, a feeling of heat, tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow
coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds either to the organ pattern of Heat in Bright
Yang within the identification of patterns according to the Six
Stages or to the pattern of Dry-Heat in the Intestines within the
identification of patterns according to the Four Levels.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Constipation with small stools, or alternation of constipation with
diarrhoea, difficulty in defecation, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic constipation, exhaustion after bowel movement, stools not
dry, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Blood deficiency 
 
Dry stools, difficulty in defecation, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Yin deficiency of the Stomach and Intestines
Constipation, dry stools, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire
to eat, dull or slightly burning epigastric pain, abdominal pain, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but no desire
to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, a slight feeling of
fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, or
without coating, in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Dry stools, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower
backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
1756
throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency
Constipation with difficulty in opening the bowels with a feeling
of exhaustion afterwards, thin and long stools that are not dry,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, slight shortness
of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime
sweating, a dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency
to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Cold in the Intestines
Constipation, stools not dry, absence of bowel movement for
several days, spastic abdominal pain, a cold sensation in abdomen,
thick white tongue coating, Deep-Wiry pulse.
Dampness in the Intestines
Constipation, a feeling of fullness and heaviness of the abdomen,
abdominal pain, sticky taste, thick sticky tongue coating on the
root, pulse Slippery on both Rear positions.
Retention of food in the Intestines
Constipation, abdominal pain alleviated by evacuation, a feeling of
fullness of the abdomen, thick sticky tongue coating on the root,
pulse that is Slippery on both rear positions.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
When a patient complains about ‘constipation’,
always establish clearly what they are referring to (i.e.
frequency of stool, consistency of it or difficulty in
passing a stool).
1757
ALTERNATION OF CONSTIPATION
AND LOOSE STOOLS
Alternation of constipation and loose stools means that the patient
goes through periods of constipation (by which is meant that the
stools are infrequent or rather difficult and bitty) followed by a
period of loose stools; these periods may last days or weeks.
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Alternation of periods of constipation and loose stools, small and
bitty stools, straining on defecation during the periods of
constipation, abdominal distension, abdominal pain that is not
relieved by the bowel movement, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, 
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, tongue that may have Red sides (if Liver-Qi
stagnation predominates) or Pale sides (if Spleen-Qi deficiency
predominates), pulse that is Wiry on the left and Weak on the
right.
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Spleen, Dampness
Alternation of periods of constipation and loose stools, small and
bitty stools, mucus in the stools, straining on defecation during
the periods of constipation, abdominal distension and fullness,
abdominal pain that may be relieved by the bowel movement (if
Dampness predominates), hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen,
tongue that may have Red sides (if Liver-Qi stagnation
predominates) or Pale sides (if Spleen-Qi deficiency predominates)
with a sticky coating, pulse that is Wiry on the left and Soggy on
the right.
Severe Spleen-Qi deficiency
Alternation of constipation and loose stools, no abdominal pain or
fullness, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
1758
stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I find nearly always that the so-called ‘irritable bowel
syndrome’ characterized by alternation of constipation
and loose stools is due to three pathogenic conditions in
varying proportions:
—Liver-Qi stagnation
—Spleen-Qi deficiency
—Dampness.
INCONTINENCE OF FAECES
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Incontinence of faeces, early-morning diarrhoea, lower backache,
cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
impotence, decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, loose stools, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension, a desire to lie down, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency 
Incontinence of faeces, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, a dislike of speaking, tendency to
catch colds, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
This pattern usually occurs only in the elderly.
BLOOD AND MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
1759
Diarrhoea with blood and mucus, a burning sensation of the anus,
a feeling of heaviness, abdominal pain, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of Yin of the Stomach and Intestines with
Empty-Heat
Blood and mucus in the stools, dull abdominal pain, dull or
burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, dry
mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst with a desire
to drink in small sips, feeling of hunger but no desire to eat, night
sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, Red tongue (or Red
centre only) without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Intestines
Diarrhoea with a lot of mucus and a little blood, abdominal pain
and fullness, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of heaviness, cold limbs,
Pale tongue with sticky white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Large Intestine deficient and cold
Diarrhoea with little mucus and blood, dull abdominal pain that is
relieved by the application of heat, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
tiredness, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Intestines
Diarrhoea with mucus and blood, foul-smelling stools, a burning
sensation of the anus, fever, a feeling of heat, abdominal pain, Red
tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Blood and mucus in the stools may indicate ulcerative
colitis and the patient should always be referred for a
colonoscopy.
1760
MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Dampness in the Intestines
Mucus in the stools, loose stools, abdominal fullness/pain, a
feeling of heaviness of the abdomen, a sticky taste, sticky tongue
coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Mucus in the stools, loose stools with foul smell, a burning
sensation of the anus, abdominal fullness and pain, a feeling of
heaviness of the abdomen, a sticky taste, thirst without desire to
drink, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
BLOOD IN THE STOOLS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Chinese medicine differentiates this symptom according to the
colour of the blood to identify the pattern without consideration of
the site of bleeding. In this instance, however, it is important to
ask the patient to obtain a Western diagnosis as well. In fact, blood
in the stools can be caused by bleeding haemorrhoids or anal
fissures, or by bleeding within the large intestine; obviously these
two symptoms are very different in pathology and severity.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Fresh blood in the stools, loose stools, smelly stools, abdominal
pain, a burning sensation in the anus, a feeling of heaviness,
abdominal fullness, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating and red
spots on the root, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Profuse fresh blood in the stools, no smell, loose stools, slight
abdominal pain, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after
eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of taste
1761
sensation, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heat in the Intestines
Dark blood in the stools, abdominal pain, constipation, a feeling of
heat, thirst, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Intestines
Diarrhoea with mucus and blood, foul-smelling stools, a burning
sensation of the anus, fever, feeling of heat, abdominal pain, Red
tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Intestines
Dark blood in the stools, abdominal pain, dark complexion,
anxiety, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Fresh blood in the stools, constipation, dizziness, tinnitus, dull
occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of
limbs, malar flush, dry eyes, blurred vision, lower backache, dry
throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry vagina, night sweating,
scanty menstruation, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
DIFFICULTY IN DEFECATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Difficulty in defecation’ is a translation of the complex Chinese
symptom called 
li ji hou zhong
 
. This symptom is composed of two
parts: 
li ji
 
means that the patient has abdominal pain and the urge
to defecate but is unable to; 
hou zhong
 
means that the patient does
defecate eventually but the abdominal discomfort is not relieved
by it and there is a feeling of heaviness after defecation.
Stagnation of Qi in the Intestines
1762
Difficulty in defecation, abdominal distension, abdominal pain
before defecation not relieved after defecation, small, bitty stools,
Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Difficulty in defecation, abdominal pain relieved by defecation,
burning sensation in the anus, mucus in the stools, foul-smelling
stools, a feeling of heaviness, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Difficulty in defecation or loose stools, tiredness after defecation,
slight abdominal distension, poor appetite, tiredness, pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Intestines Dryness and Liver-Blood deficiency 
Difficulty in defecation, dry stools, dull abdominal pain, dry skin,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
STRAINING IN DEFECATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Straining in defecation’ means that the patient does have a
bowel movement every day but the movement takes a long time
and involves straining. ‘Straining in defecation’ differs from
‘constipation’ in three respects:
 
1. 
 
With ‘straining in defecation’, unlike ‘constipation’,
there is a bowel movement every day
2. 
 
With ‘straining in defecation’, unlike ‘constipation’
the stools are not dry
3. 
 
With ‘straining in defecation’, unlike ‘constipation’,
there are no other obvious abdominal symptoms such
as pain, fullness or distension.
1763
Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Straining in defecation, small stools, alternation of constipation
and diarrhoea, stools sometimes dry and bitty and sometimes
loose, abdominal distension, flatulence, tiredness, poor appetite,
normal-coloured tongue (or slightly Red on the sides in severe
cases of Liver-Qi stagnation), pulse Wiry on the left and Weak on
the right.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency 
Straining in defecation with a feeling of exhaustion afterwards,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, tendency to catch colds, dislike of cold, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
This pattern usually occurs in the elderly.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency 
Straining in defecation, occasionally loose stools, exhaustion after
defecation, slight abdominal distension, lower backache, cold and
weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence,
decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, poor appetite, a desire to lie down, early-
morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
This pattern usually occurs in the elderly.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Straining in defecation, dry stools, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair and skin, brittle
nails, night sweating, scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Intestines
Straining in defecation, mucus in the stools, foul-smelling stools,
burning sensation in the anus, abdominal pain and fullness, a
1764
feeling of heaviness, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Heat in the Intestines
Straining in defecation, small stools, a feeling of heat, thirst, red
face, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
1765
CHAPTER 73
 
URINATION
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DARK URINE
PALE AND ABUNDANT URINE
TURBID URINE
PAINFUL URINATION
SCANTY AND DIFFICULT URINATION
DIFFICULT URINATION
FREQUENT URINATION
DRIBBLING OF URINE
INCONTINENCE OF URINE
NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
URINATION AT NIGHT
BLOOD IN THE URINE
SPERM IN THE URINE
DARK URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
1766
Dark urine, frequent and urgent urination, burning on urination,
difficult urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine, thirst with no desire
to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, feeling of heat, thick,
sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with red spots, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dark and scanty urine, slight burning on urination, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, insomnia, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Heart and Small Intestine
Dark urine which may contain blood, burning on urination, a
feeling of heat, anxiety, red face, insomnia, palpitations, tongue
ulcers, excessive dreaming, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow
coating, Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver
Dark and scanty urine, urinary difficulty, burning on urination,
fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal
discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, genital papular
or vesicular shin rashes and itching, Red tongue with redder sides
and sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Intestines
Dark and scanty urine, thirst, abdominal pain, constipation,
abdominal fullness, Red tongue with dry yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Intestines
Dark and turbid urine coloured like tea, 
not
 
scanty, difficulty in
urination, mucus in the stools, abdominal fullness and pain, pale
complexion, a feeling of heaviness, cold limbs, sticky white tongue
coating on the root, Slippery-Slow pulse.
1767
In this pattern, it is the Dampness, rather than the Cold, that
makes the urine darkish and turbid.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In women it is often difficult to establish the colour of
the urine as they often do not look after micturition to
take notice of the colour.
PALE AND ABUNDANT URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pale and abundant urine, urination at night, lower backache, cold
knees, feeling cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees,
tiredness, lassitude, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Cold in the Bladder
Pale and abundant urine, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, lower
backache, central-lower abdominal pain that is alleviated by the
application of heat, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
TURBID URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Dampness in the Bladder
Turbid urine like rice soup, difficult urination, pain on urination, a
feeling of heaviness, sticky tongue coating on the root, Slippery
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether the Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
1768
Turbid and dilute urine like a sauce, scanty urine, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry
mouth and throat at night, lower backache, constipation, tiredness,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Turbid and abundant urine, dribbling after urination, urination at
night, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, impotence,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Turbid urine, dribbling after urination, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
PAINFUL URINATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Painful urination’ comes under the Chinese medicine heading
of 
Lin
 
disease, which, by definition, is characterized by painful
urination. There are six types of 
Lin
 
diseases: Heat, Stone, Qi,
Blood, Sticky and Fatigue 
Lin
 
, all of which present with painful
and difficult urination.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Pain during urination, difficult urination, burning on urination,
dark urine, turbid urine, frequent and urgent urination, thirst with
no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat,
thick, sticky yellow coating on the root with red spots, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire 
Pain during urination, burning on urination, dark urine,
occasionally blood in the urine, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, feeling agitated, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red
1769
tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Burning pain during urination, dark urine, hypogastric distension,
headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
 
irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, Red tongue
with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Pain before urination, hypogastric distension, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Stasis of Blood in the Bladder
Painful before urination, blood in the urine, stabbing hypogastric
pain, lower abdominal pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Slight pain during urination, scanty and dark urine, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, scanty dark
urine, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
SCANTY AND DIFFICULT URINATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Scanty, difficult and painful urination, dark urine, turbid urine,
frequent and urgent urination, thirst with no desire to drink,
hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow
coating on the root with red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1770
Liver-Qi stagnation
Scanty and difficult urination, absence of pain during urination,
pain and distension of the hypogastrium before urination,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Scanty and difficult urination, dark urine, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Scanty and difficult urination, pale urine, absence of pain on
urination, urination at night, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Normally, Kidney-Yang deficiency causes the urination to be
abundant; however, in rare cases, Kidney-Yang may be so deficient
that it fails to move fluids at all and therefore the urine becomes
scanty.
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Dampness
Scanty and difficult urination, absence of pain on urination, pale,
slightly turbid urine, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, abdominal fullness, a sticky taste, tiredness, excessive
vaginal discharge, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Deficient Lung-Qi not descending 
Scanty and difficult urination, absence of pain on urination,
oedema of face, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak
voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, a dislike of
cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1771
DIFFICULT URINATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Difficult and painful urination, dark and turbid urine, frequent
and urgent urination, thirst with no desire to drink, hypogastric
fullness and pain, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow coating on
the root with red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency 
Difficult urination but absence of pain, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, a dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
This condition generally occurs only in the elderly.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Difficult urination but absence of pain, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, loss of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Difficult urination pale urine, absence of pain on urination, lower
backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Difficult urination but absence of pain, pain and distension of the
hypogastrium before urination, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
1772
Stasis of Blood in the Lower Burner
Difficult urination, pain before micturition, urination stops and
starts, hypogastric pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
FREQUENT URINATION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Frequent urination’ indicates excessive frequency of micturition.
This varies between men and women as women have a larger
bladder and need to urinate less frequently than men; thus
‘frequent urination’ could be defined as urinating more than three
times a day for women and more than about five to six times for
men. Urinating at night is never normal and is also a type of
frequent urination, which will be discussed separately below.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Frequent, abundant and pale urination, urination at night, lower
backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, impotence, decreased libido, Pale
and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Frequent urination, a feeling of bearing down, slight incontinence
of urine, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, tendency to catch colds,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Frequent, scanty and dark urination, burning on urination,
difficulty in urination, thirst with no desire to drink, hypogastric
fullness and pain, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow coating on
the root with red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
1773
Frequent, scanty and dark urine, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at
night, lower backache, constipation, tiredness, normal-coloured
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
We should not ask patients whether urination is
frequent but should ask specifically how many times
they urinate in a day. This information is often of no
clinical value if the patient is forcing himself or herself
to drink large amounts of water.
DRIBBLING OF URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
Kidney-Qi not firm
Dribbling of urine which is worse after sex, clear frequent
urination, weak-stream urination, abundant urination,
incontinence of urine, urination at night, soreness and weakness of
the lower back, weak knees, premature ejaculation, in women
prolapse of uterus, chronic white vaginal discharge, tiredness, a
dragging-down feeling in the lower abdomen, a feeling of cold,
cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Dribbling of urine, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium,
loss of sense of taste, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Dribbling of urine, difficult urination, burning on urination, dark
urine, turbid urine, frequent and urgent urination, thirst with no
desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, feeling of heat, thick
sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with red spots, Slippery-
1774
Rapid pulse.
INCONTINENCE OF URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Incontinence of urine’ should be differentiated from ‘enuresis’
(see below): the former indicates involuntary urination with the
person conscious of it happening, whereas enuresis, usually
occurring at night, indicates involuntary urination of which the
person is not conscious.
Kidney-Qi not firm
Incontinence of urine which is worse after sex, clear frequent
urination, weak-stream urination, abundant urination,
incontinence of urine, urination at night, soreness and weakness of
the lower back, weak knees, premature ejaculation, in women
prolapse of uterus, chronic white vaginal discharge, tiredness, a
dragging-down feeling in the lower abdomen, a feeling of cold,
cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency 
Incontinence of urine, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, tendency to
catch colds, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
This usually occurs in old people.
Heat in the Bladder
Incontinence of urine, scanty dark urination, burning on urination,
thirst, dry yellow tongue coating, pulse Wiry on the left Rear
position and Rapid.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Incontinence of urine, scanty urination, dark urine, dizziness,
tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull
occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the
1775
limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry hair
and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Nocturnal enuresis’ should be differentiated from ‘incontinence
of urine’: the former occurs at night and the person is obviously
unaware of it; the latter occurs at any time and the person is aware
it is happening. Nocturnal enuresis should also be differentiated
from urination at night (or nocturia): the former occurs when the
person is asleep and is obviously not conscious of it; the latter
occurs when the patient wakes and gets up at night to urinate.
Nocturnal enuresis is much more frequent in children.
Kidney-Yang deficiency 
Nocturnal enuresis, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, impotence,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
In children, this is usually a constitutional Kidney-Yang
deficiency and due to their age, there will not be many symptoms
of Kidney deficiency. Indeed, if a child suffers from nocturnal
enuresis and the tongue is Pale and the Kidney pulse is Weak,
these signs are enough to diagnose a constitutional Kidney-Yang
deficiency. This child will usually be a quiet, shy child without
much energy.
Liver-Fire 
 
Nocturnal enuresis, dark urine, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
This is fairly common in children and this child will be tense
and highly strung, in contrast to the previous condition of
1776
constitutional Kidney-Yang deficiency. As in the former pattern, a
child may have very few symptoms of Liver-Fire such as red sides
of the tongue, irritability and thirst.
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Nocturnal enuresis, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, slight
abdominal distension, a bearing-down 
feeling, prolapse of the
uterus, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Nocturnal enuresis, slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak
voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, a dislike of speaking, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, a dislike of
cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Nocturnal enuresis, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor
memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
URINATION AT NIGHT
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Urination at night’ should be differentiated from ‘nocturnal
enuresis’: the difference has been explained above under
‘Nocturnal enuresis’.
In Chinese medicine, any degree of urination at night is
considered abnormal, that is, a person should not get up to urinate
at night at all. Thus, even if the patient gets up only once, this
would still be considered as ‘urination at night’. Obviously the
more times the patient gets up to urinate, the more serious is the
condition. In Western medicine, frequent urination at night may
indicate prostate hypertrophy.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Urination at night, abundant pale urination, lower backache, cold
1777
knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees,
tiredness, lassitude, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Urination at night, abundant clear urination, lower backache, cold
and weak knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
impotence, decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, loose stools,
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down,
early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
BLOOD IN THE URINE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 31
‘Blood in the urine’ should be differentiated from ‘Blood Painful-
Urination Syndrome’ (
Lin
 
disease): the former simply indicates the
presence of blood in the urine without pain, whereas the latter
indicates painful urination with blood in the urine.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Blood in the urine, difficult urination, turbid urine, frequent and
urgent urination, burning on urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine,
thirst with no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a
feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with
red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver
Blood in the urine, dark urine, urinary difficulty, burning on
urination, fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or
hypogastrium, bitter taste, nausea, feeling of heaviness of the
body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, mid-cycle
bleeding/pain, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow
coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Blood in the urine, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
mental restlessness, feeling agitated, insomnia, dream-disturbed
1778
sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with
redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Blood in the urine, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor
memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pale blood in the urine, abundant clear urination, urination at
night, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension,
a desire to lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
SPERM IN THE URINE
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Sperm in the urine, burning on urination, difficult urination,
frequent and urgent urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine, thirst
with no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of
heat, thick, sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with red spots,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Sperm in the urine, dark-scanty urine, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, lower
backache, poor memory, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of
heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Qi not firm
Sperm in the urine, dribbling of urine which is worse after sex,
frequent clear urination, weak-stream urination, abundant
1779
urination, incontinence of urine, urination at night, soreness and
weakness of the lower back, weak knees, premature ejaculation.
1780
CHAPTER 74
 
ANUS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
ITCHING OF THE ANUS
HAEMORRHOIDS
ANAL PROLAPSE
ANAL FISSURE
ANAL FISTULA
ANAL ULCERS
ITCHING OF THE ANUS
Damp-Heat in the Bladder channel
Intense itching of the anus, haemorrhoids, frequent and urgent
urination, burning on urination, difficult urination, dark-yellow
turbid urine, thirst with no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness
and pain, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow tongue coating on
the root with red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Bladder channel
Itching of the anus, haemorrhoids, frequent and urgent urination,
difficult urination, a feeling of heaviness in the hypogastrium and
urethra, pale and turbid urine, sticky white tongue coating on root,
1781
Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Governing Vessel
Itchy anus, haemorrhoids, stiffness and pain of the spine, lower
backache, headache, painful urination, sticky yellow tongue
coating on the root, Pulse Floating and Long on all three positions
of the left side.
Blood deficiency generating Empty-Wind 
Slight itching of the anus, dryness of the anus, anal fissures, no
pain or burning, dry skin, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or
Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
HAEMORRHOIDS
Damp-Heat in the Bladder channel
Bleeding haemorrhoids, pain, redness and swelling of the anus,
fresh red blood, frequent and urgent urination, burning on
urination,
 
difficult urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine, thirst with
no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat,
thick, sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with red spots,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood in the Bladder
channel
Bleeding haemorrhoids, dark blood, pain and swelling, difficulty
in defecation, hypogastric distension and pain, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Haemorrhoids, may be bleeding with fresh red blood but absence
of pain, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, depression, a bearing-down feeling, prolapse of the uterus,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1782
Liver-Fire
Bleeding haemorrhoids, fresh or dark red blood, burning, pain and
swelling, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
ANAL PROLAPSE
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Anal prolapse which may come and go, no redness, no pain, no
swelling, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the
limbs, depression, a bearing-down feeling, prolapse of the uterus,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Anal prolapse, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder channel
Anal prolapse, swelling, redness and pain of the anus, frequent
and urgent urination, burning on urination, difficult urination,
dark-yellow/turbid urine, thirst with no desire to drink,
hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat, thick, sticky yellow
coating on the root with red spots, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
ANAL FISSURE
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Anal fissure, redness, swelling and itching of the anus, fresh red
blood in the stools, frequent and urgent urination, burning on
urination, difficult urination, dark-yellow/turbid urine, thirst with
1783
no desire to drink, hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat,
thick, sticky yellow coating on the tongue root with red spots,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood deficiency and Intestines Dryness 
 
Anal fissure, dryness of the anus, dry stools, pain in the anus,
difficulty in defecation, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale and dry tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Fire in the Intestines
Anal fissure, constipation, dry stools, redness and burning of the
anus, burning abdominal pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink
cold liquids, mental restlessness, dry mouth, a feeling of heat,
tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid
pulse.
ANAL FISTULA
Full-Heat
Anal fistula, swelling and burning of the anus, oozing of a yellow
fluid, constipation, mental restlessness, a feeling of heat, thirst,
Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Empty-Heat
Anal fistula, burning of the anus, oozing of a thin fluid, a feeling
of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Empty-Cold
Anal fistula, absence of burning, pain or swelling, a feeling of cold,
oozing of a thin fluid, cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak-Slow
pulse.
ANAL ULCERS
1784
Deficiency of Lungs, Spleen and Kidneys
Anal ulcers that are not painful or raised, pale red in colour, no
burning, oozing a thin fluid, loose stools, slight shortness of
breath, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tiredness, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, weakness of the limbs, lower
backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, weak knees, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Toxic Heat
Anal ulcers, swelling, pain, redness of the anus, thirst, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with red points and sticky yellow coating on the
root, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1785
CHAPTER 75
 
MEN’S SEXUAL
AND GENITAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
IMPOTENCE
LACK OF LIBIDO
EJACULATION
Premature ejaculation
Nocturnal emissions
Inability to ejaculate
Blood in the sperm
Cold watery sperm
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation
PRIAPISM
COLD GENITALS
SCROTUM
Contraction of the scrotum
1786
Loose scrotum
Scrotum drooping to one side
Swollen scrotum
Swollen and oozing scrotum
Pale scrotum
Red scrotum
Purple scrotum
Dark scrotum
Itchy scrotum
PENIS
Pain and itching of the penis
Soft and withered penis
Redness and swelling of the glans penis
Peyronie’s disease
Ulcers
SWELLING AND PAIN OF THE TESTICLES
PUBIC HAIR
Loss of pubic hair
Excessive pubic hair
IMPOTENCE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 45
‘Impotence’ should be differentiated from ‘lack of libido’: the
former indicates an inability to sustain or obtain an erection while
the sexual desire is normal; the latter indicates lack of sexual
desire while the erection is normal.
1787
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Impotence, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Spleen- and Heart-Yang deficiency
Impotence, premature ejaculation, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
oedema, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion,
spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of discomfort or stuffiness
in the heart region, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
This type of impotence is very common, probably more so than
the type from Kidney deficiency.
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Impotence, burning on urination, sperm in the urine, difficult
urination, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Impotence, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, hardness of hearing,
lower backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry
throat in the evening, dry 
hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Impotence, softening of bones in adults, deafness, weakness of
knees and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature
greying of the hair, weakness of sexual activity, lower backache,
infertility, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
1788
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, impotence is due more often to a
Heart disharmony than to a deficiency of Kidney-Yang.
• 
 
In treatment with acupuncture, I treat the Heart (HE-
7 Shenmen, Du-24 Shenting and Ren-15 Jiuwei with Ren-
4 Guanyuan).
• 
 
In treatment with herbal medicine do not forget to
add one or two herbs to invigorate Blood, especially Dan
Shen 
Radix Salviae milthiorrhizae
 
.
LACK OF LIBIDO
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 45
In Chinese medicine, libido depends on the state of the Fire of
the Gate of Life (
Ming Men
 
), which represents the Fire within the
Kidneys and is also called the Minister Fire. A deficiency of this
Fire may cause lack of libido in both men and women (and also
infertility), whereas an excess of this Fire may cause excessive
sexual desire.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Lack of libido, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Lack of libido, premature ejaculation, palpitations, shortness of
breath on exertion, spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of
discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Lack of libido, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream- disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
1789
pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Lack of libido, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, poor appetite, loose stools, tiredness,
Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Lack of libido, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the throat, Wiry pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my experience, lack of libido in men is often
caused by a Heart deficiency, whereas in women a
Kidney deficiency is more common.
EJACULATION
Premature Ejaculation
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 45
Kidney-Qi not firm
Premature ejaculation, dribbling of urine which is worse after sex,
frequent clear urination, weak-stream urination, incontinence of
urine, soreness and weakness of the lower back, weak knees,
tiredness, a dragging-down feeling in the lower abdomen, a feeling
of cold, cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Premature ejaculation, burning on urination, urinary difficulty,
dark urine, genital papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching,
fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, Red tongue with
1790
redder sides and sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Heart-Yang deficiency
Premature ejaculation, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion, 
weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, oedema,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, spontaneous
sweating, a slight feeling of discomfort or stuffiness in the heart
region, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Heart-Qi descending plays a role in ejaculation.
Therefore premature ejaculation may be due to Heart-Qi
deficiency. For this reason, I treat the Heart and
Kidneys.
Nocturnal Emissions
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 45
‘Nocturnal emissions’ indicates ejaculation during sleep. This
symptom always has ‘pride of place’ among Kidney-deficiency
symptoms in Chinese books. In the West, this symptom is
relatively rare and it is not even considered a ‘symptom’ unless it
occurs very frequently (e.g. once a week or more). There are
cultural reasons why this symptom always has a prominent place
among Kidney-deficiency symptoms in Chinese books because in
ancient times ejaculation during sleep, especially if with sexual
dreams, was considered to be due to the man having intercourse
with female ghosts at night; such ghosts were considered very
dangerous because they robbed men of their vital Essence.
Heart-Fire
Nocturnal emissions with dreams, premature ejaculation,
palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
1791
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi and Heart-Blood deficiency
Nocturnal emissions without dreams, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, weakness of the
limbs, loose stools, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Nocturnal emissions with dreams, premature ejaculation,
excessive sexual desire, palpitations, mental restlessness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, anxiety, poor memory, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal emissions
with dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-
palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue with redder
tip and a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Minister Fire blazing upwards
Nocturnal emissions with dreams, premature ejaculation,
excessive sexual desire, thirst, a feeling of agitation, a feeling of
heat, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Qi not firm
Nocturnal emissions without dreams, premature ejaculation,
dribbling of urine which is worse after sex, frequent clear
urination, weak-stream urination, incontinence of urine, soreness
and weakness of the lower back, weak knees, tiredness, a dragging-
down feeling in the lower abdomen, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Nocturnal emissions with dreams, burning on urination, dark and
turbid urine, itchy scrotum, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
1792
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Nocturnal emissions without dreams, lack of libido, impotence,
softening of bones in adults, deafness, weakness of knees and legs,
poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of the
hair, weakness of sexual activity, lower backache, infertility,
sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and Floating-
Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency occurs
against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale tongue and
Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-Yang
deficiency.
Inability To Ejaculate
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Inability to ejaculate, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in
small sips, lower backache, scanty dark urine, insomnia, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Lower Burner
Inability to ejaculate, abdominal pain, mental restlessness, pain in
the testis, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood In The Sperm
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Blood in the sperm, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night
sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in
the evening, malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
lower backache, scanty dark urine, insomnia, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Blood in the sperm, turbid sperm, burning on urination,
hypogastric fullness and pain, pain and swelling of the scrotum,
dark urine, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1793
Toxic Heat in the Lower Burner
Blood in the sperm, a feeling of heaviness and pain of the
perineum, urethral discharge, abdominal pain, Red tongue with
sticky, thick yellow coating and red points, Slippery-Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Lower Burner
Blood in the sperm, pain in the perineum, difficulty in urination,
abdominal pain, purple complexion, Purple tongue, Firm pulse.
Cold-Watery Sperm
Kidney-Qi not firm
Cold-watery sperm, premature ejaculation, impotence, dribbling of
urine which is worse after sex, frequent clear urination, weak-
stream urination, incontinence of urine, soreness and weakness of
the lower back, weak knees, tiredness, a dragging-down feeling in
the lower abdomen, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Cold in the Lower Burner
Cold-watery sperm, impotence, lack of libido, abdominal pain, a
feeling of cold in the scrotum, cold limbs, a feeling of cold, lower
backache, pale face, abundant pale urination, white tongue
coating, Deep-Weak-Slow pulse.
Tiredness And Dizziness After Ejaculation
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 45
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation, impotence, decreased
libido, tinnitus, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, Pale and wet tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
1794
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation, impotence, decreased
libido, nocturnal emissions, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor
memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower
backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen-Blood and Heart-Blood deficiency
Tiredness and dizziness after ejaculation, palpitations, dizziness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency
to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse.
PRIAPISM
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
‘Priapism’ indicates persistent abnormal erection of the penis
accompanied by pain and tenderness.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Persistent erection, pain in the testis, fullness of the
hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, genital papular or vesicular skin
rashes and itching, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Persistent erection, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night
sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in
the evening, malar flush, 
thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
lower backache, scanty dark urine, insomnia, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
COLD GENITALS
1795
Deficiency of Minister Fire
Cold genitals, backache, lack of libido, impotence, a feeling of cold,
dizziness, depression, pale-abundant urination, Pale tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
Cold genitals, contracted scrotum, fullness and distension of the
hypogastrium, with pain which refers downwards to the scrotum
and testis and upwards to the hypochondrium, alleviation of the
pain by warmth, straining of the testis or contraction of the
scrotum, vertical headache, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet,
vomiting of clear watery fluids or dry vomiting, Pale and wet
tongue with white coating, Deep-Wiry-slow pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Lower Burner
Cold genitals, abdominal fullness, turbid urine, abdominal pain, a
feeling of heaviness, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky white
tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
SCROTUM
Contraction Of The Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
Contraction of the scrotum, fullness and distension of the
hypogastrium with pain, which refers downwards to the scrotum
and testis and upwards to the hypochondrium, alleviation of the
pain by warmth, straining of the testis or contraction of the
scrotum, vertical headache, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet,
vomiting of clear watery fluids, or dry vomiting, Pale and wet
tongue with white coating, Deep-Wiry-slow pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Contraction of the scrotum, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the
1796
limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Chinese books explain that this condition is due to overexertion
after an acute disease.
Collapse of Yang
Contraction of the scrotum, chilliness, cold limbs, weak breathing,
profuse sweating with sweat-like pearls, absence of thirst, profuse
pale urination or incontinence of urine, loose stools, incontinence
of faeces, mental confusion or unconsciousness, Pale-Wet-Short
tongue, Deep-Minute pulse.
Collapse of Yin
Contraction of the scrotum, abundant perspiration, skin hot to the
touch, hot limbs, dry mouth, retention of urine, constipation, Red,
Short tongue without coating, Floating-Empty-Rapid pulse.
Loose Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Loose scrotum, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold,
bright-white complexion, weak knees, tired-ness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen-Qi sinking
Loose scrotum, a feeling of bearing down, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Scrotum Drooping To One Side
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
1797
Empty-Cold in the Lower Burner
Scrotum drooping on side, a feeling of cold in the abdomen,
abundant clear urination, lack of libido, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak-
Slow pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lower Burner
Scrotum drooping on side, a feeling of heaviness in the abdomen,
obesity, urethral discharge, Swollen tongue, Slippery pulse.
Swollen Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Swollen scrotum, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Swollen scrotum, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion,
tiredness, listlessness, depression, spontaneous sweating, a slight
feeling of discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of
cold, cold hands, bright-pale face, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty internal Wind
Swollen scrotum, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness or
tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion,
tremors, tic, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Swollen And Oozing Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
1798
Red and swollen scrotum oozing a sticky fluid, pain in the
testicles, genital, papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching,
urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, fullness of the
hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor
appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body, Red tongue
with redder sides and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Liver channel
Red, swollen and painful scrotum oozing a sticky fluid, ulcers on
the penis, pain in the testicles and perineum, genital papular skin
rash and itching, burning on urination, dark urine, Red tongue
with thick, sticky yellow coating and red spots on the root and
sides, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Pale Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pale scrotum, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Red Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Red scrotum, pain in the testis, fullness of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, nausea, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, genital papular or vesicular skin rashes and
itching, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
1799
Toxic Heat in the Liver channel
Red scrotum, pain, swelling, redness and itching of the testis, dark
urine, burning on urination, hypogastric fullness and distension,
painful penis, thick, sticky yellow tongue coating, Overflowing-
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Purple Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Liver-Blood stasis
Purple scrotum, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, masses in the
abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Damp-Heat with Blood stasis in the Liver channel
Purple scrotum, persistent erection, pain in the testis, tenderness
and pain of penis, genital papular or vesicular skin rashes and
itching, urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine,
fullness of the hypochondrium,
 
abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body,
hypochondrial/abdominal pain, masses in the abdomen, purple
nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Red tongue with
purplish sides and sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Dark Scrotum
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Stagnation of Cold in the Liver channel
Dark scrotum, straining of the testis or contraction of the scrotum,
fullness and distension of the hypogastrium with pain, which
refers downwards to the scrotum and testis and upwards to the
hypochondrium, alleviation of the pain by warmth, vertical
headache, a feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, vomiting of clear
watery fluids or dry vomiting, Pale and wet tongue with white
1800
coating, Deep-Wiry-Slow pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dark scrotum, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear
urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Itchy Scrotum
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Itchy and burning of the scrotum, sweaty scrotum, burning on
urination, dark urine, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Itchy scrotum, dry skin, bleeding on scratching, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night,
five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, scanty dark
urine, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Lower Burner
Itchy and sweaty scrotum, a feeling of heaviness of the scrotum,
turbid urine, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
PENIS
Pain And Itching Of The Penis
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Pain and itching of the penis, dark urine, burning on urination,
turbid urine, irritability, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
1801
Blood stasis in the Lower Burner
Pain in the penis, hypogastric pain, blood in the urine, abdominal
pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Pain and itching of the penis, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a
feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with a desire to
drink in small sips, lower backache, scanty-dark urine, insomnia,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Pain and itching of the penis, dark urine, burning on urination,
premature ejaculation, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue
ulcers, mental restlessness, feeling agitated, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Soft And Withered Penis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Liver-Qi deficiency
Soft and withered penis, timidity, tendency to being easily startled,
difficulty in making decisions, sighing, depression, inability to
make plans, nervousness, lack of courage and initiative, restless
dreams, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, mild hypochondrial
discomfort, Pale tongue, pulse Empty on the left.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Soft and withered penis, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to sip water, lower backache, poor memory,
scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Soft and withered penis, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, 
tiredness, lassitude,
1802
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis in the Lower Burner
Soft and withered penis, inability to ejaculate, abdominal pain, a
feeling of heaviness in the abdomen, mental restlessness, pain in
the testis, Swollen and Purple tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Redness And Swelling Of The Glans Penis
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Toxic Heat in the Liver channel
Redness and swelling of the glans penis, painful urination, thick
urethral discharge, hypogastric pain, Red tongue with red points
on the side and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Redness and swelling of the glans penis, persistent erection, pain
in the testis, tenderness and pain of penis, genital papular or
vesicular skin rashes and itching, urinary difficulty, burning on
urination, dark urine, fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or
hypogastrium, bitter taste, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Peyronie’s Disease
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Peyronie’s disease is an unnatural curvature of the penis, which
is noticeable during an erection. It may prevent a complete
erection, owing to plaque or scar tissue inside the penis. The
curvature may also cause a painful erection which may be so
severe as to make intercourse impossible.
Blood stasis in the Liver channel
1803
Peyronie’s disease, painful curvature of the penis, painful erection,
hypogastric pain, painful urination, hypochondrial/abdominal
pain, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse.
Dampness in the Lower Burner with Blood stasis in the
Liver channel
Peyronie’s disease, painful curvature of the penis, painful erection,
swelling and hardening under the skin of the penis, a feeling of
heaviness and fullness of the lower abdomen, urethral discharge,
hypogastric pain, painful urination, hypochondrial/abdominal
pain, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, Purple
tongue with sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery or Firm-Slippery pulse.
Blood stasis in the Liver channel with Kidney-Yang
deficiency
Peyronie’s disease, curvature of the penis, soft erection,
hypogastric pain, painful urination, hypochondrial/abdominal
pain, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion, lower
backache, cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
weak knees, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination,
urination at night, impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet
tongue with purplish sides, Deep-Weak pulse.
Cold in the Liver channel with Blood stasis
Peyronie’s disease, painful curvature of the penis, painful erection,
straining of the testis or contraction of the scrotum, fullness and
distension of the hypogastrium, with pain which refers downwards
to the scrotum and testis and upwards to the hypochondrium,
alleviation of the pain by warmth, vertical headache, a feeling of
cold, cold hands and feet, vomiting of clear watery fluids or dry
vomiting, hypochondrial/abdominal pain, purple nails and lips,
purple or dark complexion, Bluish-Purple tongue, white coating,
Deep-Wiry-Slow pulse.
Ulcers
1804
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Red ulcers on the penis, oozing of fluid, swelling and pain of the
penis, genital papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching, urinary
difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, fullness of the
hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter taste, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, Red tongue with redder sides and
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Painful, red ulcers on the penis oozing a sticky yellow fluid,
swelling and redness of the penis, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Kidney deficiency with Dampness
Ulcers on the penis, itching and oozing a sticky fluid, lower
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of fullness and heaviness of
the lower abdomen, sticky yellow tongue coating, Deep-Weak and
slightly Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Ulcers on the penis, edges of the ulcers not raised, not painful,
dizziness, tinnitus, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, malar flush, dry eyes, blurred
vision, lower backache, dry throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails,
dry vagina, night sweating, dry stools, scanty dark urine, scanty
menstruation, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Ulcers on the penis, with itching, heat and pain, thirst, a feeling of
heat, skin rashes, Red tongue with thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1805
SWELLING AND PAIN OF THE
TESTICLES
Cold in the Lower Burner
Swelling and pain of the testicles, abdominal pain, pale urine, a
feeling of cold, white tongue coating, Deep-Tight pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Lower Burner
Swelling of the testicles with slight pain, abdominal fullness and
pain, a feeling of heaviness, turbid urine, sticky white tongue
coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner
Swelling and pain of the testicles, abdominal fullness and pain, a
feeling of heaviness, dark and turbid urine, burning on urination,
sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi in the Lower Burner
Swelling and pain of the testicles that come and go, abdominal
distension, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Lower Burner
Swelling, pain and hardness of the testicles, hypogastric pain,
burning on urination, swelling of scrotum, fever, thirst, Red
tongue with thick, sticky yellow coating and red spots on the root,
Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
PUBIC HAIR
Loss Of Pubic Hair
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Loss of pubic hair, softening of bones in adults, deafness,
1806
weakness of knees and legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair
or premature greying of the hair, weakness of sexual activity, lower
backache, sterility, dizziness, tinnitus, normal-coloured tongue and
Floating-Empty or Leather pulse if Kidney-Essence deficiency
occurs against a background of Kidney-Yin deficiency, or Pale
tongue and Deep-Weak pulse if against a background of Kidney-
Yang deficiency.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Loss of pubic hair, lower backache, cold and weak knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, impotence, decreased libido,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a desire to
lie down, early-morning diarrhoea, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Excessive Pubic Hair
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 17
Phlegm and Blood stasis
Excessive pubic hair, pain in the genital area, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen and Purple tongue, Slippery-Wiry
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Excessive pubic hair, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to sip water, backache, poor memory, scanty
dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
1807
CHAPTER 76
 
SWEATING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
SPONTANEOUS SWEATING
NIGHT SWEATING
SWEATING FROM COLLAPSE
YELLOW SWEAT
LOCALIZED SWEATING
Unilateral sweating
Sweating on the head
Sweating on the chest
Sweating of hands and feet
Sweating of the palms
Sweating in the axillae
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
SPONTANEOUS SWEATING
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Lung-Qi deficiency
1808
Spontaneous sweating which is worse on exercise, slight shortness
of breath, slight cough, weak voice, dislike of speaking, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, a dislike of
cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Yang deficiency
Spontaneous sweating which is worse on exercise, slight shortness
of breath, slight cough, weak voice, dislike of speaking, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of
cold, a feeling of cold, cold hands, Pale and wet tongue, Weak
pulse.
Full-Heat
Profuse spontaneous sweating, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental
restlessness, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
This may be Full-Heat in the Heart, Liver, Lungs, or Stomach.
Phlegm-Heat
Profuse daytime sweating, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
sputum in the throat, mental restlessness, thirst with no desire to
drink, Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
This can be Phlegm-Heat affecting the Lungs, Stomach or Heart.
Invasion of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Wind
Slight sweating, aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy throat, slight
breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose 
with clear watery discharge,
sneezing, occipital headache, body aches, thin white tongue
coating, Floating-Slow pulse.
This is due to a disharmony between Nutritive and Defensive
Qi.
Wind-Dampness on the Exterior
Spontaneous sweating, aversion to cold, fever, swollen glands,
nausea, occipital stiffness, body aches, muscle ache, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, swollen joints, a feeling of heaviness of the
1809
limbs, headache, sticky white tongue coating, Floating-Slippery
pulse.
Invasion of Summer-Heat
Slight sweating, fever, aversion to cold, headache, a feeling of
heaviness, an uncomfortable sensation in the epigastrium,
irritability, thirst, tongue Red in the front or sides with a sticky
white coating, Soggy and Rapid pulse.
NIGHT SWEATING
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Night sweating is called in Chinese 
dao han
 
, which literally
means ‘thief sweating’; this name probably refers to the fact that
night-time sweating is very depleting of the body’s energies and it
‘robs’ the body of its Qi. Both daytime and night-time sweating
deplete the body’s energy: the former depletes Qi and Yang, and
the latter Yin. Thus both daytime and night-time sweating start a
pathological vicious circle because they can derive from a
deficiency but they also aggravate that deficiency.
Yin deficiency
Night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, dry
throat in the evening, scanty dark urine, dry stools, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This may be Yin deficiency of several different organs: the
Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Kidneys or Spleen.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Profuse night sweating, five-palm heat, feeling of heat in the
evening, dry mouth at night with a desire to drink in small sips,
malar flush, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Night sweating, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium
and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst
1810
without a desire to drink, nausea, loose stools with an offensive
odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Heart
Night sweating, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, pale
face, tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous sweating,
dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety,
tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale
and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
This is less common than the night sweating from Yin deficiency
and it usually occurs in women.
Lesser-Yang pattern
Night sweating, bitter taste, hypochondrial discomfort, dry throat,
alternation of hot and cold feeling, irritability, unilateral coating on
the tongue, Wiry pulse.
This can be either the Lesser-Yang pattern within the Six Stages
identification of patterns (in which there is a prevalence of cold
feeling) or the Gall-Bladder Heat pattern within the Four Levels
identification of patterns (in which there is a prevalence of hot
feeling). This type of night sweating usually follows a febrile
disease.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: night sweating is 
not
 
always caused by
Yin deficiency!
SWEATING FROM COLLAPSE
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Collapse of Qi and Yin
Profuse sweating like oil drops, a feeling of heat, body hot to the
touch, thirst, collapse, Red tongue without coating, Deep-Minute-
Rapid pulse.
1811
Collapse of Yang
Profuse sweating like pearls, watery sweat, body cold to the touch,
a feeling of cold, cold limbs, unconsciousness, 
pale face, weak
breathing, Pale tongue, Hidden pulse.
YELLOW SWEAT
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Yellow sweat was first mentioned in the ‘Synopsis of
Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet’ (
Jin Gui Yao Lue
 
, c.
AD200). In 
Chapter 14
 
, where yellow sweat is mentioned three
times, it says: 
‘With Yellow Sweat disease there is swelling, fever,
thirst and yellow sweat like Phellodendron sap [i.e. bright-yellow]’.
1
Damp-HEAT
Yellow sweat like 
Phellodendron
 
sap all over the body, fever,
swelling, a feeling of heaviness, sticky/bitter taste, sticky yellow
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved, which
may be the Stomach, Spleen, Liver or Gall-Bladder.
Nutritive and Defensive Qi obstructed
Fever, sweat like 
Phellodendron
 
sap, swelling, a feeling of heaviness
of the body, a feeling as if there were insects crawling under the
skin, thirst, difficult urination, white tongue coating, Deep pulse.
This pattern is characterized by a deficiency of the Defensive Qi
and a stagnation of the Nutritive Qi (this is the exact opposite of
the Greater-Yang Wind pattern); fluids are retained, Qi is
obstructed and the Bladder’s function is impaired. This cause of
yellow sweat is less frequent than the previous one.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat
Yellow sweat which stains the clothing particularly in the axilla,
hypochondrium or genital region, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, a slight feeling of oppression of the chest, irritability,
premenstrual tension, irregular periods, premenstrual breast
1812
distension, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of heat, red
face, thirst, propensity to outbursts of anger, heavy periods,
tongue Red on the sides, Wiry and slightly Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency
Yellow sweat in the upper back, hypochondrium or head worse
after exertion, slight shortness of breath, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
This pattern is more common in the elderly.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and Dampness
Yellow sweat that stains the clothing in the axilla or genital region,
greasy skin, dry throat at night, a feeling of heat in the evening,
night sweating, five-palm heat, malar flush, insomnia, anxiety, dry
mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, excessive vaginal
discharge, a feeling of heaviness, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and slightly Slippery pulse.
LOCALIZED SWEATING
Unilateral Sweating
Unilateral sweating can occur on the left or the right side of the
body. From an acupuncture perspective, this symptom is often due
to an imbalance within the Yin or Yang Heel vessels. Unilateral
sweating was mentioned in the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of
Internal Medicine ’ Simple Questions’ (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
),
which says in 
Chapter 3
 
: ‘
 
Unilateral sweating is due to a
withering of the channels on that side of the body
 
’.
 
2
 
A ‘withering’
or weakness of the channels on one side of the body may occur as
a result of an accident to that side or after a high fever which
injures the Yin fluids and leads to malnourishment of the channel
of that side.
1813
Wind-Phlegm
Unilateral sweating, severe dizziness, blurred vision, tremors,
unilateral numbness or tingling of a limb, tinnitus, nausea,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Stiff or
Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Phlegm with Blood stasis
Unilateral sweating, unilateral numbness of a limb, dizziness,
nausea, phlegm in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
pain in the limbs, Purple and Swollen tongue, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Unilateral sweating, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/ 
tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Unilateral sweating, contraction of tendons, contraction of hands,
a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, epigastric fullness, a feeling of
heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, sticky
white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Nutritive- and Defensive-Qi not harmonized
Unilateral sweating, fever, occipital headache, aversion to cold,
stiff neck, Floating-Slow pulse.
Wind-Dampness in the Girdle Vessel
Sweating of the upper or lower half of the body, numbness of the
legs, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen and legs, cold feet,
pulse that is Wiry on both Middle positions.
Sweating On The Head
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
1814
Stomach Damp-Heat steaming upwards
Sweating on the head, facial pain, stuffed nose or thick, sticky
nasal discharge, a feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium, a
feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, a
feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
In this case, Dampness does not accumulate in the limbs but
‘steams’ upwards to the head; this is more likely to happen when
Heat is pronounced.
Liver-Fire
Sweating on the head, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Deficient Yang floating upwards
Sweating on the head, pale complexion, cold limbs, shortness of
breath, a feeling of cold, tiredness, Weak-Deep pulse.
Retention of food with Stomach-Heat in children
Sweating on the head at night, restless sleep, waking up with
crying during the night, vomiting, fullness, pain and distension of
the epigastrium which are relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting
of sour fluids, foul breath, sour regurgitation, belching, loose
stools or constipation, poor appetite, thirst, a feeling of heat, thick,
sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Sweating On The Chest
Observation
 
, 
Chapter 20
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Sweating on the chest is also called ‘heart region sweating’.
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Sweating on the chest, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous
sweating, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
1815
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Sweating on the chest especially in the evening or night,
palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, anxiety, poor
memory, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache,
night sweating, scanty dark urine, normal-coloured tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This is a common cause of sweating in the chest area.
Sweating Of Hands And Feet
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 14
 
and 
20
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Sweating of hands and feet, hot hands, swollen fingers and toes, a
feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium and lower
abdomen, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness, thirst without a
desire to drink, nausea, loose stools with an offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion, sticky taste, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Sweating of hands and feet, cold hands, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, 
pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, uncomfortable
feeling in the epigastrium, loss of sense of taste, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Yin deficiency
Sweating of hands and feet, dry mouth that is worse after sleep,
dry lips, no appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat,
constipation (dry stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain,
dry mouth and throat especially in the afternoon, thirst but with
no desire to drink, or a desire to drink in small sips, slight feeling
of fullness after eating, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
or without coating in the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
1816
Sweating Of The Palms
Observation
 
, 
Chapters 14
 
and 
20
 
; 
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
Lung-Qi deficiency
Sweating of the hands, slight shortness of breath, slight cough,
weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of speaking,
bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness,
dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Sweating of the hands in the afternoon, cough which is dry or with
scanty, sticky sputum, weak/hoarse voice, dry mouth and throat,
tickly throat, tiredness, dislike of speaking, thin body or thin chest,
night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating (or with
rootless coating) in the front part, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency
Sweating of the hands, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, pale face, tiredness, slight depression, spontaneous
sweating, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Profuse sweating of the hands, cold hands, palpitations, shortness
of breath on exertion, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, a slight
feeling of discomfort or stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of
cold, cold hands, bright-pale face, slightly dark lips, Pale tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Sweating of the hands in the evening, palpitations, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
bothered’, dry mouth and throat, night sweating, normal-coloured
tongue without coating or with rootless coating, Floating-Empty
pulse, especially on the left Front position.
1817
Sweating In The Axillae
The Liver and Heart channels influence the axilla.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Sweating in axillae, dizziness, numbness/tingling of limbs,
insomnia, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes, scanty menstruation or
heavy bleeding (if Empty-Heat is severe), malar flush, cramps,
withered and brittle nails, dry hair and skin, a feeling of heat in the
evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, thirst with a desire to
drink in small sips, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and slightly Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
Smelly sweating in axillae, fullness/pain of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or epigastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a
feeling of heaviness of the body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal
itching, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, burning on urination, dark urine,
yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting, Red tongue with redder
sides and unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry-
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Sweating in axillae, palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip
fluids, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating,
five-palm heat, Red tongue, redder on the tip with no coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Sweating in axillae, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1818
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 41
In exterior invasions of Wind, it is always important to ask about
sweating, as absence of sweating indicates invasion of Wind-Cold
with the prevalence of Cold and this corresponds to the Greater-
Yang stage within the Six Stages identification of patterns. The
Greater-Yang stage is always caused by the invasion of Wind-Cold,
of which there are two types: one with the prevalence of Cold (in
which there is no sweating), the other with the prevalence of Wind
(in which there is sweating). Thus, it is very important in the initial
stages of invasion of external Wind to ask about the presence or
absence of sweating, especially if herbal medicine is used because
there are two quite distinct prescriptions depending on whether
there is a prevalence of Cold or Wind. These are Gui Zhi Tang
Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
 
for prevalence of Wind and Ma
Huang Tang 
Ephedra Decoction
 
for prevalence of Cold.
In other exterior conditions, absence of sweating usually
indicates Cold or Cold-Dampness in the superficial layers of the
body (the space between skin and muscles).
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Absence of sweating, aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy throat,
slight breathlessness, stuffed or runny nose with clear watery
discharge, sneezing, occipital headache, body aches, thin white
tongue coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Cold on the Exterior, Heat in the Interior
Absence of sweating in any part of the body, aversion to cold,
fever, restless legs, mental restlessness, thirst, sore throat, cough
with yellow sputum.
Cold-Dampness on the Exterior
Absence of sweating, headache, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and limbs, muscle ache, painful joints, dislike of cold.
1819
NOTES
1. 
Ren, He. A New Explanation of the Synopsis of
Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet 
Jin Gui Yao Lue Xin
Jie
 
 
). Zhejiang: Zhejiang Science Publishing House,
1981; 120.
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:17 First
published c. 100
BC
1820
CHAPTER 77
 
SKIN SIGNS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
GREASY SKIN
DRY SKIN
ERUPTIONS
Eczema
Psoriasis
Acne
Urticaria
Rosacea
Rash in the axillae
Red, itchy and swollen fingers
INFECTIONS
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster
Tinea
Candida
GROWTHS AND MASSES
1821
Warts
Naevi (moles)
Malignant melanoma
Furuncle (boil) on the head
Carbuncles on the neck
Carbuncles on the upper back
Nodules under the skin
NECK ULCERS
Due to the nature of skin diseases, in most cases only the skin
signs will be given for each pattern without the other
accompanying symptoms and signs pertaining to the Internal
Organs.
GREASY SKIN
Dampness
Greasy skin, tendency to spots, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, epigastric fullness, a sticky taste, a feeling of oppression
of the chest, excessive vaginal discharge, sticky tongue coating,
Slippery or Soggy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved and
on whether Dampness is associated with Cold or Heat.
Damp-Phlegm
Greasy skin, puffy face, dark rings under the eyes in chronic cases,
blackheads, greasy hair, tendency to sinus problems, chronic
cough with expectoration of profuse, sticky white sputum which is
easy to expectorate, a feeling of oppression of the chest, dizziness,
blurred vision, somnolence, nausea, sputum in the throat,
muzziness of the head, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
1822
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Phlegm-Heat
Greasy skin, tendency to red papules, dark rings under the eyes in
chronic cases, blackheads, greasy hair, tendency to sinus problems,
red face, puffy face, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the
head, a feeling of heat, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, expectoration of
yellow sputum, dizziness, nausea, Red and Swollen 
tongue with
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
DRY SKIN
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Liver-Blood deficiency 
 
Dry skin, dry hair, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness or
tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Dry skin, thin hair, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with a desire
to sip water, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dry skin, dry hair, dry eyes, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at
night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Dry skin, dry hair, dry eyes, floaters in eyes, blurred vision,
dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion but with red cheekbones, withered and
brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night sweating, normal-coloured
1823
tongue without coating, Fine or Floating-Empty pulse.
Lung Dryness
Dry skin with acute onset, dry cough, dry throat, hoarse voice, dry
tongue.
Wind-Dryness invading the Lungs
Dry skin with acute onset, aversion to cold, fever, dry cough, dry
throat, itchy throat, hoarse voice, sore throat, Floating pulse.
Severe, chronic Blood stasis
Dry skin, dark face, dark rings under the eyes, abdominal pain,
abdominal masses, painful periods, purple lips, Purple tongue,
Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved. Blood
stasis causes a dry skin only in severe and chronic cases.
Full-Heat
Dry skin, red face, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness,
insomnia, Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Empty-Heat
Dry skin, scaly skin, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening,
thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, mental restlessness, five-
palm heat, night sweating, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the organ involved.
Wind in the skin
Dry skin, itchy skin, numbness/tingling of the limbs, skin
eruptions that move around, come and go quickly and affect the
top part of the body.
This is neither an external Wind, such as that seen in common
colds and flu, nor internal Wind but simply ‘Wind’ in the skin, a
1824
condition frequently seen in skin diseases.
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind
Chronic dry skin, itchy skin, scaly skin with white scales, slight
tremor of the head/hand, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision,
unilateral numbness/tingling of a limb, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine and slightly Wiry pulse.
ERUPTIONS
Eczema
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat with predominance of Heat 
Red papular rash, vesicles, exudate, erosion, itching, a feeling of
heat in the limbs, swollen, red and pain-ful joints, epigastric
fullness, sticky and bitter taste, thirst with no desire to drink, a
feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat with predominance of Dampness 
Red papular rash, vesicles, exudate, weeping skin eruptions,
thickening of the skin, itching, epigastric fullness, sticky taste,
thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood deficient and dry
Chronic eczema, pale-red skin eruptions, dry skin, erosion, itching,
thickening of the skin, ridges on the skin, dry hair, brittle nails,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Chronic eczema, pale-red papular rash, vesicles, exudate, weeping
skin eruptions, slight itching, poor appetite, slight abdominal
1825
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale or sallow
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, abdominal
fullness, a feeling of heaviness, sticky taste, poor digestion,
undigested food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal headache,
excessive vaginal discharge, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy
pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my opinion, atopic eczema in children is caused by
a congenital deficiency of the Defensive-Qi systems of
the Lungs and Kidneys.
Psoriasis
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Blood-Heat
Red skin eruptions, hot limbs, itching with a feeling of heat, thirst,
Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat with Wind and Dryness
Red skin eruptions, red scales, dry skin, hot limbs, intense itching
with feeling of heat, thirst,
Blood deficient and dry with Wind in the skin
Pale-red skin eruptions, dry and scaly skin with white scales,
thickening of the skin, itching, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood stasis
Purple skin eruptions (often nummular or verrucous), chronic
condition, dry skin, thickening of the skin, itching, purplish limbs,
dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Blood stasis with Wind and Dryness
1826
Purple skin eruptions (often nummular or verrucous), chronic
condition, dry scales, dry skin, thickening of the skin, intense
itching, purplish limbs, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or
Choppy pulse.
Wind and Heat in the skin
Acute red skin eruptions, itching, itchy area changing from day to
day, hot limbs, a feeling of heat, thirst, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat with Wind and Dampness in the skin
Red, papular or vesicular skin eruptions often in skin creases,
puffy skin, exudate, scaly skin, itching, Red and Swollen tongue,
Overflowing-Rapid-Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Pale-red macules covered by a thin layer of greyish-white scales,
dry hair and skin, numbness/tingling of limbs, brittle nails,
dizziness, tinnitus, dull occipital or vertical headache, insomnia,
malar flush, dry eyes, blurred vision, lower backache, dry throat,
dry vagina, night sweating, dry stools, scanty dark urine, scanty
menstruation, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Acne
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat in the skin
Acne with red, papular eruptions, greasy skin, puffy face, sticky
yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat in the skin
Acne with large, red, pustular eruptions that are painful, a feeling
of heat, red face, red eyes, Red tongue 
with red points and thick,
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in the skin
1827
Acne with large, dark red or purple, pustular eruptions that are
painful, a feeling of heat, dark face, red eyes, Reddish-Purple
tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Overflowing-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Chronic acne with pale-red, papular or vesicular eruptions which
take a long time to come to a head, greasy skin, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Heat in the Stomach and Lungs
Acne with small, red, papular eruptions, on the face, chest and
upper back, dry skin, blackheads, red face, a feeling of heat, Red
tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the skin
Acne with large, pale, vesicular eruptions, greasy skin, puffy face,
greasy hair, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Damp-Phlegm with Blood stasis in the skin
Acne with large, dark, purple, papular eruptions, dark complexion,
puffy face, dry skin if Blood stasis predominates, greasy skin if
Damp-Phlegm predominates, Purple and Swollen tongue,
Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Disharmony of Penetrating and Directing Vessels 
Acne that starts with puberty, greasy skin, papular eruptions
which are aggravated before the period in females.
The essential characteristics of this condition are its onset at
puberty and its aggravation before the period in females. This
condition can manifest with any of the above patterns.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
When I treat acne, especially in women, I always
harmonize the Penetrating and Directing Vessels,
irrespective of the pattern.
1828
Urticaria
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Wind-Heat in the skin
Urticaria with acute onset, red wheals with distinct margins,
intense, generalized itching, itchy area changing from day to day,
Red tongue, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Cold in the skin
Urticaria with acute onset, pale or pale-red wheals, itching,
Floating pulse.
Heart-Fire
Urticaria with large, red wheals which could be cord shaped rather
than round, swelling and discoloration of the skin on scratching,
itching worse at night, mental restlessness, insomnia, Red tongue
with redder tip and dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with internal Wind
Chronic urticaria that comes and goes with pale-red wheals,
aggravated by overexertion, slight itching, dry skin, dry hair, Pale
and dry tongue, Fine or Choppy pulse.
Toxic Heat in the skin
Urticaria with bright-red or dark-red wheals which may join
together to form large patches, acute onset, severe itching, a
feeling of heat, mental restlessness, Red tongue with red points
and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Heat in the skin with Stomach- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency
Chronic urticaria with pale or pale-red wheals with indistinct
margins, aggravated by overexertion, slight itching, aggravated by
eating certain foods, loose stools, tiredness, poor appetite, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
1829
Disharmony of the Penetrating and Directing Vessels 
Urticaria which is worse before the periods and better after, and
worse in the lower part of the body and legs, slight itching.
Blood stasis in the skin
Urticaria with large, dark-red or purple wheals, itching, worse at
night, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Urticaria with red wheals with distinct margins, elicited by eating
certain foods, itching, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat
Urticaria with wheals which are very large and bright red, itching,
an intense feeling of heat, skin very hot to the touch, mental
restlessness, insomnia, thirst, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
Rosacea
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Heat in Lungs and Stomach
Erythema of the face, especially like two large butterfly wings to
the sides of the nostrils, a feeling of heat, thirst, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood-Heat
Erythema of the face with papular skin eruptions, a feeling of heat,
mental restlessness, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Chronic erythema of the face with dark colour, dark papular skin
1830
eruptions, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry or Choppy pulse.
Toxic Heat
Pustular red, rash of the cheeks with swelling of the nose, a feeling
of heat, insomnia, thirst, mental restlessness, Red tongue with red
points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Rash In The Axillae
Liver-Qi stagnation with Blood-Heat
Rash in the armpit, swelling and pain, a feeling of heat, headache,
Red tongue with redder sides and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat
Red rash in the armpit, oozing pus, painful, swollen, skin hard,
fever, thirst, Red tongue with red points and sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Rash in the armpit with pustular or papular eruptions,
hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion and eyes, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness, unilateral or bilateral
thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Red papular rash in the armpit, palpitations, thirst, agitation,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, feeling of heat, red face, bitter
taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Red, Itchy And Swollen Fingers
Observation,
 
Chapter 14
1831
Toxic Heat in the Stomach
Red, itchy and swollen fingers, swelling of the fingers, numbness,
a feeling of heat, thirst, Red tongue with red points and thick,
sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach
Red, itchy and swollen fingers, swelling of the fingers, epigastric
fullness, sticky taste, thirst with no desire to drink, sticky yellow
tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of external Toxic Heat
Red, swollen and painful fingers to the side of the nails with acute
onset, white fingers, shivers, fever, Floating-Rapid pulse.
INFECTIONS
Herpes Simplex
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat in the skin
Red papular or vesicular skin eruptions around the mouth or
nostrils, erythema, itching, pain, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the skin with Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic, red, papular or vesicular skin eruptions around the
mouth or nostrils which come and go, aggravated by overexertion,
erythema, slight itching, Pale tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Soggy-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat in the skin
Dark-red, papular or pustular skin eruptions around the mouth or
nostrils, itching, pain, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness,
Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1832
Invasion of Toxic Heat 
Acute, red, papular eruptions around the mouth or eyes in
newborn babies and infants, crying at night.
Damp-Heat with invasion of Wind-Heat
Acute, red, papular eruptions in the top part of the body, especially
face, with intense itching, aversion to cold, fever, headache, eye
pain, tongue Red on the sides/front, Floating-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Papular or pustular herpes eruptions in the genital area, itching, a
feeling of heaviness, malaise, fever, sticky taste, tongue Red on the
sides with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and Damp-Heat
Chronic, recurrent, lingering, pale-red, papular eruptions, exudate,
puffy skin, night sweating, a feeling of heat in the evening, dry
mouth, desire to drink in small sips, five-palm heat, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Herpes Zoster
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Wind-Heat in the skin
Papular skin eruptions in the upper part of the body preceded by
intense itching, later turning into vesicles oozing a clear fluid,
tongue Red on the sides/front with red points, Floating-Rapid
pulse.
Damp-Heat in the skin
Vesicular skin eruptions oozing a sticky fluid, itching, tongue Red
on the sides/front with red points and sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder and Liver
1833
Papular skin eruptions later turning into vesicles oozing a sticky
yellow fluid, itching, fullness/pain of the hypochondrium,
abdomen or epigastrium, bitter taste, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, burning on
urination, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and unilateral
or bilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Late stage of herpes zoster infection, dark, papular rash, intense
pain.
Toxic Heat
Painful, pustular eruptions, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental
restlessness, insomnia, Red tongue with red points and thick,
sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Large, painful, dark-red or purple, pustular eruptions which last a
long time, mental restlessness, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Tinea
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat
Tinea with redness and swelling of the skin, pustular swelling of
the scalp (tinea capitis), itchy vesicular rash of the feet (tinea
pedis), Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat
Tinea with redness, pain and pronounced swelling of the skin,
pustular swelling of the scalp (tinea capitis), painful pustular rash
of the feet (tinea pedis), Red tongue with thick, sticky yellow
coating and red points, Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Wind-Heat
1834
Tinea with sudden onset, with redness, itching and papular rash of
the scalp, tongue Red on the sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Dampness with chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic tinea, characterized by a pale-red rash with a white ring
around the lesions with scaling, excessive vaginal discharge, poor
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale or sallow complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste,
poor digestion, undigested food in the stools, nausea, Pale tongue
with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
Candida
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Damp-Heat
Candida with weepy rash in the flexures of the body (under
breasts in women, axilla, groin or between fingers and toes),
redness and itching of the skin, itchiness, soreness and redness of
the vulva, vagina or penis, white plaques and swelling of the inside
of the mouth, epigastric fullness, sticky taste, thirst with no desire
to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a feeling of
heat, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Dampness
Candida with weepy rash in the flexures of the body (under
breasts in women, axilla, groin or between fingers and toes),
itching of the skin, itchiness and soreness of the vulva, vagina or
penis, white plaques and swelling of the inside of the mouth,
epigastric fullness, sticky taste, a feeling of heaviness of the head
and body, a feeling of heat, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery
pulse.
Dampness with chronic Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic candida with weepy rash in the flexures of the body
(under breasts in women, axilla, groin or between fingers and
1835
toes), itching of the skin, itchiness and soreness of the vulva,
vagina or penis, excessive vaginal discharge, white plaques and
swelling of the inside of the mouth, epigastric fullness, a sticky
taste, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue with
a sticky white coating, Soggy pulse.
GROWTHS AND MASSES
Warts
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Blood deficiency and Dryness
Common warts usually on the hands, dry and pale brown in
colour, dry skin, dry hair, blurred vision, Pale and dry tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood-Heat
Reddish or brown warts, a feeling of heat, mental restlessness,
insomnia, thirst, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Dark-brown warts, dark complexion, mental restlessness, dry skin,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Genital warts on the penis or vulva and vagina, genital itching and
pain, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow coating,
Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat with Toxic Heat
Painful genital warts with pustular eruption, a feeling of heat,
thirst, mental restlessness, Red tongue with red points and thick,
sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1836
Naevi (Moles)
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Blood-Heat
Red or light brown moles, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat
Brown moles in the lower part of the body, Red tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Dark-brown naevi, dark complexion, mental restlessness, dry skin,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Malignant Melanoma
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
Blood-Heat
Red or bright-brown moles, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Dark-red or dark-brown moles with nodules, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood-Heat with Damp-Heat
Brown moles with plaques, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Furuncle (Boil) On The Head
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Painful furuncle on the head oozing pus, greasy skin, facial pain,
stuffed-up nose or thick sticky nasal discharge, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, a feeling of
heaviness especially of the head, thirst without desire to drink,
1837
dull-yellow complexion, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Summer-Heat with Toxic Heat
White, movable furuncle on the head shaped like an egg or a plum,
of acute onset in summertime and oozing pus, Red tongue with
sticky white coating, Rapid pulse.
Carbuncles On The Neck
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
Painful carbuncle on the neck, shaped like a honeycomb, oozing
yellow pus, fever, with higher fever when the carbuncle breaks and
oozes pus, headache, a feeling of heaviness, sticky taste, nausea,
epigastric fullness, thirst, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating and Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Empty-Heat with Toxic Heat in the Stomach
Carbuncle on the neck that is dark in colour, not oozing pus until
late stages, skin slow in healing after breaking, a feeling of heat in
the evening, dry throat, dry stools, night sweating, five-palm heat,
insomnia, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Carbuncle on the neck that is light in colour, not oozing pus until
late stages, skin slow to heal after breaking, oozing thin dilute pus,
poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice, palpitations, tiredness,
blurred vision, dull-pale complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak
or Choppy pulse.
Carbuncles On The Upper Back
Toxic Heat in Stomach and Lungs
Carbuncles on the upper back, red, swollen, painful, fever, thirst,
Red tongue with red points and thick, sticky yellow coating, Rapid-
Slippery-Overflowing pulse.
1838
Summer-Heat
Carbuncles on the upper back, sudden onset in summer time, red,
swollen, painful, dizziness, fever, insomnia, Red tongue with thin
yellow coating, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Nodules Under The Skin
Soft nodules under the skin are, by definition, due to Phlegm.
Generally they are not red, not painful, not hot and not hard; they
are usually shaped like a plum and are movable. They do not break
and produce pus.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
Soft, movable nodules under the skin, tiredness, poor appetite,
loose stools, Pale and Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Weak
and slightly Slippery pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Soft nodules under the skin that are slightly red, expectoration of
yellow sputum, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of
heat, Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Nodules under the skin, headache, giddiness, possibly
hypertension, blurred vision, numbness of the limbs, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, nausea, headache, Swollen and Stiff
tongue, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
This condition is more common in the elderly.
NECK ULCERS
Heat in Liver and Stomach
Neck ulcers that are hard and shaped like an egg, red in colour,
painful, burning, headache, bitter taste, thirst, Red tongue with
dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1839
Toxic Heat in Lungs and Stomach
Ulcers on the neck, red, swollen, painful, thirst, headache, cough,
Red tongue with dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Liver-Qi and Liver-Blood stagnation
Ulcers on the neck on both sides, hard like a stone, shaped like a
plum or an egg, dark in colour, or no change in skin colour,
painful, no feeling of heat, not oozing pus until late stages, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-Blood stasis with Phlegm
Ulcers on the neck behind the ear, shaped like a plum, not hard,
immovable, no skin colour changes, no feeling of heat, no pain,
Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
1840
CHAPTER 78
 
EMOTIONAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
PROPENSITY TO ANGER
PROPENSITY TO WORRY
SADNESS
FEAR/ANXIETY
TENDENCY TO BE EASILY STARTLED
EXCESS JOY
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
SEVERE TIMIDITY
INAPPROPRIATE LAUGHTER
PROPENSITY TO ANGER
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Liver-Qi stagnation
Repressed anger with occasional outbursts, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
1841
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Propensity to outbursts of anger, irritability, headache, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Propensity to severe outbursts of anger, irritability, aggressiveness,
insomnia, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter taste, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Venting one’s anger helps only if there is Liver-Qi
stagnation; with Liver-Yang rising and Liver-Fire,
venting one’s anger will only fan it more.
PROPENSITY TO WORRY
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Worry, slightly obsessive thinking, slight depression, overthinking,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness,
spontaneous sweating, 
poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Lung-Qi deficiency
Worry, depression, dislike of speaking, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, bright-
white complexion, tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of
cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1842
Lung-Qi stagnation
Worry, mild irritability, depression, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling of oppression or
distension of the chest, slight breathlessness, sighing, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very slightly
Tight on the right Front position.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Worry, depression, insomnia, poor memory, anxiety, dream-
disturbed sleep, poor memory, tendency to be easily startled,
palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and
Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Worry which increases after the period in women, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Worry, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety,
tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness,
‘feeling hot and bothered’, palpitations, dry mouth and throat,
night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or with
rootless coating, Floating-Empty pulse especially on the left Front
position.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Worry, especially in the evening, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, palpitations,
dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat,
Red tongue, redder on the tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
1843
• 
 
Worry is one of the most pervasive emotional causes
of disease in Western patients. It affects the Lungs and
Heart and it causes pathology of the chest and breasts.
SADNESS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
This includes a sad emotional state with frequent crying.
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency
Sadness, crying, depression, dislike of speaking, palpitations,
shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness, weak voice,
spontaneous daytime sweating, bright-white complexion, tendency
to catch colds, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Sadness, crying, mental confusion, aimlessness, poor memory,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs,
scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
This pattern is more common in women and is due to sadness
affecting the Liver.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Sadness, crying, depression, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, poor memory, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Sadness, mild irritability, depression, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling of oppression or
distension of the chest, slight breathlessness, sighing, tongue
slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very slightly
Tight on the right Front position.
1844
FEAR/ANXIETY
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Mild anxiety, timidity, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, numbness/ 
tingling of limbs,
palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy
pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Fearfulness, anxiety, depression, lack of will-power and motivation,
insomnia, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Mild anxiety, depression, timidity, lower backache, cold knees, a
feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence,
decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Mild anxiety, fear of the future, depression, a feeling of
aimlessness, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling
of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Gall-Bladder deficiency
Fearfulness, timidity, irresoluteness and indecisiveness when
something crops up, tendency to be easily startled, dislike of
speaking, lack of courage, fluster, sighing, restless dreams,
insomnia, nervousness, excessive dreaming, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, Pale tongue.
Liver-Qi deficiency
1845
Fear and timidity, lack of resolve, depression, unhappiness,
nervousness, tendency to be easily startled, lack of courage and
initiative, indecision, sighing, restless dreams, irritability, weak
tendons, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, hypochondrial
distension, irregular periods, Pale or normal tongue, Weak pulse.
TENDENCY TO BE EASILY STARTLED
Most of the causes of this symptom are due to Heart patterns and
the patient is likely to have a Heart crack on the tongue.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Tendency to be easily startled, insomnia, poor memory, anxiety,
dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale
complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Tendency to be easily startled that is worse in the evening, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, poor memory,
anxiety, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, dry mouth
and throat, night sweating, normal-coloured tongue without
coating or with rootless coating, Floating-Empty pulse especially
on the left Front position.
Deficiency of Heart and Gall-Bladder
Tendency to be easily startled, timidity, dislike of speaking, lack of
courage and initiative, indecisiveness, fluster, sighing, restless
dreams, insomnia, nervousness, excessive dreaming, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, Pale tongue.
This is an unusual pattern, which actually describes the
character of a person rather than a pattern; and it is based on the
idea of the Gall-Bladder being the seat of courage and
decisiveness.
Heart-Fire
Tendency to be easily startled, agitation, mental restlessness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
1846
tongue ulcers, a feeling of heat, red face, dark urine or blood in the
urine, bitter taste (after a bad night’s sleep), Red tongue with
redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Tendency to be easily startled whilst in bed, agitation, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, mental confusion, mental restlessness,
depression, manic behaviour, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or
scold people, palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression
of the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rat-tling sound
in the throat, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder swollen tip and
Heart crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or
Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Blood deficiency
Tendency to be easily startled, irritability, propensity to anger,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, dizziness,
blurred 
vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse that is also slightly Wiry on the left.
EXCESS JOY
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
A normal state of joy is obviously not a cause of disease. Several
emotional states are included under the term of ‘excess joy’. First,
it includes the sudden state of extreme elation deriving from joyful
news; this makes Qi rise and it expands the Heart. Secondly, excess
joy can be interpreted as a life characterized by excessive
excitement and stimulation; this also causes Qi to rise and may
lead to Heart-Fire. Thirdly, excess joy is seen in certain mental
conditions such as hypomania or manic behaviour.
Heart-Fire
Excess joy, permanently elated mood, excessive laughter, mental
restlessness, a feeling of agitation, dream-disturbed sleep,
1847
insomnia, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, a feeling
of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart Empty-Heat
Excess joy, a permanently elated feeling as if being driven, anxiety,
tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness,
‘feeling hot and bothered’, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
palpitations, poor memory, dry mouth and throat, thirst with a
desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush,
night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue redder on the tip with
no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Excess joy, mental confusion, excessive and inappropriate laughter,
mental restlessness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling of
agitation, palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in
the throat, bitter taste, shouting, Red tongue with redder swollen
tip and Heart crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-
Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
‘Mental restlessness’ is a translation of the term 
fan zao
 
, which
literally means ‘vexation and restlessness’. It also includes restless
legs. The term 
fan zao
 
encompasses two different symptoms: 
fan
(vexation) is due to Full-Heat and pertains to the Lungs, whereas
zao
 
(restlessness) is due to Empty-Heat and pertains to the
Kidneys. 
Fan
 
is Yang, whereas 
Zao
 
is Yin.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Vague mental restlessness, insomnia, restless legs, excessive
dreaming, anxiety, dry throat at night, a feeling of heat in the
evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, malar flush, dry mouth
with a desire to drink in small sips, Red tongue without coating,
1848
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
This is a general pattern of Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat,
which may affect the Kidneys, Heart or Lungs.
Phlegm-Heat in the Stomach and Heart
Mental restlessness, mental confusion, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, agitation, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people,
shouting, depression, manic behaviour, palpitations, thirst, red
face, a feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, dark
urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, bitter
taste, burning epigastric pain, bleeding gums, dry mouth, mouth
ulcers, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating,
excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, tongue Red in the
centre with a sticky-yellow coating and a Stomach/Heart crack with
a rough, sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Pronounced mental restlessness, agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, a
feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip
and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Heat
Mental restlessness, worry, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling
of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
SEVERE TIMIDITY
Gall-Bladder deficiency
Severe timidity, indecisiveness, tendency to be easily startled, lack
of resolve, dislike of speaking, lack of courage, fluster, fear,
irresoluteness and indecisiveness when something crops up,
sighing, restless and excessive dreaming, insomnia, nervousness,
dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, Pale tongue.
1849
Liver-Qi deficiency
Severe timidity, lack of resolve, unhappiness, weak tendons, fear,
depression, nervousness, tendency to being easily startled, lack of
courage and initiative, indecision, sighing, restless dreams,
irritability, weak tendons, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
hypochondrial distension, irregular periods, Pale or normal
tongue, Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Severe timidity, lack of will-power or confidence, lower backache,
cold knees, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
impotence, decreased libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak
pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Severe timidity, worry, inappropriate eagerness to please others,
slight depression, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion,
pale face, tiredness, spontaneous sweating, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Severe timidity, anxiety, lack of confidence, worry, slightly
obsessive thinking, slight depression, overthinking, palpitations,
shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness, spontaneous
sweating, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
INAPPROPRIATE LAUGHTER
This includes a mental state that may range from mild hypomania
to full-blown manic behaviour.
Heart-Fire
Inappropriate laughter, manic behaviour, mental restlessness, a
1850
feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations,
thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter
taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Inappropriate laughter, mental confusion, a feeling of agitation,
mental restlessness, insomnia, dream- disturbed sleep, rash
behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people, shouting, depression,
manic behaviour, palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm,
rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder
swollen tip and Heart crack with a sticky, dry yellow coating inside
it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Kidney- and Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat
Inappropriate laughter, insomnia, excessive dreaming, mental
restlessness, anxiety, poor memory, palpitations, dizziness,
tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal emissions
with dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, five-
palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue with redder
tip and a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse, or a pulse
that is Deep and Weak on both Rear positions and Overflowing on
both Front positions.
1851
CHAPTER 79
 
MENTAL AND
EMOTIONAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DEPRESSION
DEPRESSION AND MANIC BEHAVIOUR
Depressive phase
Manic phase
ANXIETY
IRRITABILITY
SCHIZOPHRENIA
DEPRESSION
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Liver-Qi stagnation
Depression, moodiness, irritability, anxiety, frustration, nervous
1852
tension, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a feeling of a lump
in the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat rebelling upwards
Depression, anxiety, insomnia, moodiness, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a
slight feeling of oppression of the chest, premenstrual tension,
irregular periods, premenstrual breast distension, a feeling of a
lump in the throat, a feeling of heat, red face, thirst, heavy periods,
tongue Red on the sides, Wiry and slightly Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Qi-Phlegm
Depression, moodiness, irritability, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, premenstrual
tension, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Depression, lack of motivation, lack of will-power, lack of initiative,
exhaustion, desire to curl up, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling
of cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Depression, tearfulness, sadness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be 
easily startled,
palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and
Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Depression, sadness, lack of direction, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency
1853
Depression, brooding, slightly obsessive thinking, anxiety,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, tendency to be
easily startled, palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale
lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools, poor appetite, scanty
periods, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Yang deficiency
Depression, lack of motivation, tendency to be easily startled,
palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, tiredness,
spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of discomfort or stuffiness
in the heart region, a feeling of cold, cold hands, bright-pale face,
slightly dark lips, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Depression, anxiety in the evening, mental restlessness, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, anxiety, poor memory, palpitations,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal
emissions with dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue
with redder tip and a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Depression, mental restlessness, anxiety, agitation, phobias,
insomnia, excessive dreaming, mental confusion, rash behaviour,
shouting, manic behaviour, a feeling of heat in the heart region,
palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
expectoration of phlegm, sputum in the throat, bitter taste, Red
tongue with redder swollen tip and Heart crack with a sticky, dry
yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Blood stasis
Depression, mental restlessness, insomnia, a feeling of agitation in
the evening, excessive dreaming, palpitations, stabbing or pricking
chest pain which may radiate to the inner aspect of the left arm or
to the shoulder, a feeling of oppression or constriction of the chest,
cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands, tongue entirely Purple or
1854
Purple only on the sides in the chest areas, Choppy or Wiry pulse.
Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Depression, mental restlessness, short temper, irritability, nausea,
dry throat, bitter taste, a feeling of fullness of the hypochondrium,
blurred vision, unilateral yellow tongue coating, Wiry pulse.
Worry injuring the Mind
Depression, feeling like in a trance, absentmindedness, lack of
initiative, sadness, worry, crying, yawning, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Diaphragm-Heat
Depression, mental restlessness, a feeling of anxiety in the chest, a
feeling of heat in the heart region, a feeling of stuffiness of the
chest, thirst, nausea, yellow tongue coating, Rapid pulse.
This is a short-term depression caused by residual Heat
following an invasion of Wind-Heat.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In chronic depression I often use BL-23 Shenshu and
BL-52 Zhishi to stimulate will-power irrespective of the
pattern.
DEPRESSION AND MANIC
BEHAVIOUR
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Depressive Phase
Stagnation of Qi and Phlegm
Depression, apathy, dull thinking, incoherent speech, muttering to
oneself, irritability, moodiness, not remembering to eat,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a feeling of a lump in the
1855
throat, premenstrual tension, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Depression, excessive dreaming, mental confusion, tendency to be
easily startled, sadness, crying, shouting, shutting of windows,
muttering to oneself, brooding, slightly obsessive thinking,
anxiety, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, tendency
to be easily startled, palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale complexion,
pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools, poor appetite,
scanty periods, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Manic Phase
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Mind
Manic behaviour, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, propensity to
outbursts of anger, shouting, scolding or hitting people,
overspending of money, exceptional physical strength, having
several projects on the go simultaneously, staying up all night,
forgetting to eat, singing, mental restlessness, a feeling of
agitation, mental confusion, incoherent speech, rash behaviour,
uncontrolled laughter, shouting, palpitations, thirst, red face, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, expectoration of phlegm,
sputum in the throat, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder-swollen
tip and Heart crack with a sticky, dry yellow coating inside it,
Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Stomach Phlegm-Fire affecting the Heart
Manic behaviour, desire to climb to high places, shouting,
laughing, singing, taking off of one’s clothes, insomnia, mental
restlessness, burning epigastric pain, thirst without a desire to
drink, bleeding gums, dry stools, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, sour
regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest and epigastrium, tongue Red in the centre with a sticky
yellow coating and a Stomach crack with a rough, sticky yellow
coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1856
Stomach and Pericardium Fire
Manic behaviour, mental restlessness, inability to lie down,
hallucinations, incoherent speech, excessive dreaming, red face,
hot hands, palpitations, burning epigastric pain, intense thirst
with a desire to drink cold liquids, dry mouth, mouth ulcers,
bleeding gums, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, nausea,
vomiting soon after eating, a feeling of heat, tongue Red with a
thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Fire injuring Yin
Chronic manic behaviour, excessive talking, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, loss of weight, malar flush, a feeling
of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid
pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: ‘manic’ behaviour does not occur only in
its extreme form but also to a mild degree in many
patients.
ANXIETY
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Heart-Blood deficiency
Mild anxiety, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations, dizziness, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Vague anxiety that is worse in the evening, insomnia, poor
memory, anxiety, mental restlessness, dream-disturbed sleep,
tendency to be easily startled, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
bothered’, palpitations, dry mouth and throat, night sweating,
normal-coloured tongue without coating or with rootless coating,
1857
Floating-Empty pulse, especially on the left Front position.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Anxiety that is worse in the evening, mental restlessness,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, uneasiness,
‘feeling hot and bothered’, palpitations, dry mouth and throat, a
feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-
palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip and without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Severe anxiety, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation,
insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, a feeling of heat, red 
face, dark urine or blood in the
urine, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Heart-Blood stasis
Severe anxiety, agitation, palpitations, stabbing or pricking chest
pain which may radiate to the inner aspect of the left arm or to the
shoulder, a feeling of oppression or constriction of the chest,
cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands, tongue entirely Purple or
Purple only on the sides in the chest areas, Choppy or Wiry pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Severe anxiety, agitation, mental restlessness, manic behaviour,
phobias, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, mental confusion,
depression, palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in
the throat, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder swol-len tip, and
Heart crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or
Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Anxiety, mental restlessness, a feeling of agitation that is worse in
the evening, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
palpitations, dizzi-ness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower
1858
backache, nocturnal emissions with dreams, a feeling of heat in
the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry
stools, Red tongue with redder tip and a Heart crack, Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Mild anxiety, mild depression, lack of direction, insomnia,
excessive dreaming, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency
Vague anxiety, depression, lack of direction, insomnia, excessive
dreaming, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes, dry hair, dry
nails, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty
menstruation, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Anxiety, depression, irritability, moodiness, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, a feeling of a lump in the throat,
premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Severe anxiety, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Anxiety, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Vague anxiety that is worse in the evening, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, poor memory, night sweating, dry mouth and
throat at night, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine,
1859
tiredness, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Deficiency of Qi of the Heart and Gall-Bladder
Mild anxiety, insomnia, timidity, absentmindedness,
indecisiveness, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations, slight
breathlessness, tiredness, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Diaphragm-Heat
Anxiety, a feeling of heat and stuffiness in the region under the
heart, thirst, dry mouth, irritability, insomnia, Red tongue, Rapid
pulse.
This pattern is caused by residual Heat following an invasion of
Wind-Heat.
IRRITABILITY
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 44
Irritability is a common emotional complaint. It includes feeling
irritable frequently, flying off the handle easily, feeling frustrated
and similar emotional states. Of the traditional seven emotions,
irritability is akin to ‘anger’ but it encompasses a broader range of
emotional states than ‘anger’ and is generally not so intense. A
propensity to anger is generally due to Liver patterns, whereas
irritability may be caused by many different patterns affecting
most organs.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Irritability, moodiness, premenstrual irritability, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, premenstrual tension, Wiry pulse, ‘I feel extremely
irritable before my periods and take it out on my family.’
Lung-Qi stagnation
Mild irritability, bouts of crying, sighing, sadness, depression, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling of
oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
1860
tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas, pulse very
slightly Tight on the right Front position, ‘I feel this lump in the
throat, I am on edge and feel like bursting into tears.’
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe irritability, agitation at night, hypochondrial/abdominal
pain, painful periods, dark and clotted menstrual blood, masses in
the abdomen, purple nails and lips, purple or dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry or Firm pulse, ‘I seethe with resentment.’
Heart-Blood stasis
Irritability, obsessive thinking, palpitations, stabbing or pricking
chest pain which may radiate to the inner aspect of the left arm or
to the shoulder, a feeling of oppression or constriction of the chest,
cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands, tongue entirely Purple or
Purple only on the sides in the chest areas, Choppy or Wiry pulse,
‘My mind is constantly judging and I feel resentful.’
Liver-Yang rising
Severe irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, headache,
dizziness, tinnitus, Wiry pulse, ‘I fly off the handle easily.’
Liver-Fire
Severe irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, headache, red
face, dizziness, tinnitus, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse, ‘I explode into a rage.’
Heart-Fire
Severe irritability, rage, agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental
restlessness, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse, ‘I
feel irritable, impatient and angry.’
Lung-Heat
1861
Irritability, bouts of crying, restlessness, cough, slight
breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring of nostrils,
thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse, ‘I feel frustrated, weepy and irritable.’
Stomach-Heat
Irritability, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, restlessness, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse, ‘I feel often angry and
obsessive.’
Liver-Blood deficiency
Mild irritability, mild impatience, vague anxiety, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation,
dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse, ‘I feel
lost, overwhelmed and on edge.’
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Mild irritability, vague anxiety and fear which is worse in the
evening, lack of will-power, tendency to be easily annoyed,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, poor memory, night
sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness, normal-coloured tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse, ‘I feel helpless,
unmotivated and on edge in the evening.’
Heart-Blood deficiency
Mild irritability, sadness, vague anxiety, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse, ‘I feel sad and on edge.’
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Vague irritability, mental restlessness that is worse in the evening,
a feeling of being on edge, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory,
1862
hardness of hearing, night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm
heat, a 
feeling of heat in the evening, thirst with a desire to sip
fluids, lower backache, constipation, scanty dark urine, tiredness,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse, ‘I
feel hot and bothered.’
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Irritability, mental restlessness that is worse in the evening, a
feeling of being on edge, sadness, anxiety, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, uneasiness,
‘feeling hot and bothered’, palpitations, poor memory, dry mouth
and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of heat in the
evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue,
redder on the tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse,
‘I feel sad and hot and bothered.’
Damp-Heat
Irritability, mental restlessness, slightly obsessive thinking, a
feeling of heaviness and fullness of the epigastrium, sticky taste,
feeling of heat, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse,
‘I feel heavy, yucky and irritable.’
Other manifestations depend on the organ involved.
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Absentmindedness, insomnia, excessive dreaming, inability to
concentrate, forgetfulness, anxiety, sadness, hearing of voices,
depression, mental confusion, tendency to be easily startled,
sadness, crying, shouting, muttering to oneself, brooding,
obsessive thinking, palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale complexion,
pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools, poor appetite,
scanty periods, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and Phlegm
Melancholy, apathy, mental dullness, incoherent speech, mumbling
1863
to onself, hearing of voices, moodiness, irritability, inappropriate
laughing and crying, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a
feeling of a lump in the throat, premenstrual tension, sputum in
the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Acute onset, hallucinations, hearing voices, violent behaviour,
abusiveness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, destructive
behaviour, a feeling of agitation, mental confusion, incoherent
speech, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people,
uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting, muttering to oneself,
palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat,
bitter taste, Red tongue with redder swollen tip and Heart crack
with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire and Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Hallucinations, hearing voices, abusiveness, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, destructive behaviour, agitation, mental
confusion, incoherent speech, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or
scold people, uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting, muttering
to oneself, palpitations, thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in
the throat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, thirst with
a desire to drink in small sips, dry throat at night, night sweating,
five-palm heat, Red and Swollen tongue with redder tip and
without coating and Heart crack with rough, dry yellow coating
inside it, Slippery-Floating-Empty-Rapid pulse.
1864
CHAPTER 80
 
MENTAL
DIFFICULTIES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
POOR MEMORY
DIFFICULTY IN CONCENTRATION
LEARNING DIFFICULTY IN CHILDREN
HYPERACTIVITY
POOR MEMORY
Qi and Blood deficiency of the Heart and Spleen 
Poor memory of distant events, excessive dreaming, insomnia,
anxiety, poor memory, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles,
loose stools, poor appetite, scanty periods, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Poor memory of recent events, absentmindedness, slow thinking,
premature greying of the hair or balding, dizziness, tinnitus, lower
1865
backache.
Poor memory of recent events, absentmindedness, slow
thinking, premature greying of the hair or balding, dizziness,
tinnitus, lower backache.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Poor memory, excessive dreaming, insomnia, anxiety, mental
restlessness, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, palpitations,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal
emissions with dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue
with redder tip and a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Turbid Phlegm in the Heart
Poor memory, somnolence, absentmindedness, insomnia, poor
memory and concentration, a feeling of muzziness of the head,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest, nausea,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Heart-Blood stasis
Poor memory, insomnia, agitation, palpitations, stabbing or
pricking chest pain which may radiate to the inner aspect of the
left arm or to the shoulder, a feeling of oppression or constriction
of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails, cold hands, tongue entirely
Purple or Purple only on the sides in the chest areas, Choppy or
Wiry pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Du-24 Shenting is an important point to stimulate
memory
DIFFICULTY IN CONCENTRATION
Spleen-Qi and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Poor concentration, difficulty in applying oneself to study, poor
1866
appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, scanty
menstruation, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Poor concentration, poor memory, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Poor concentration, poor memory, a feeling of emptiness of the
head, dizziness, tinnitus, lower backache.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Phlegm
Poor concentration that is worse in the morning, a feeling of
heaviness and muzziness of the head, dizziness, blurred vision,
sticky taste, dull frontal headache, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue with a sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Dampness
Poor concentration that is worse in the morning, a feeling of
heaviness of the head, sticky taste, dull frontal headache, sticky
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I use Du-20 Baihui to stimulate concentration.
LEARNING DIFFICULTY IN CHILDREN
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency
Learning difficulty, difficulty in concentration, poor memory,
1867
mental dullness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, tendency to be
easily startled, flaccid muscles, lassitude, apathy, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles,
loose stools, poor appetite, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Emptiness of the Sea of Marrow 
Learning difficulty, childhood weakness, mental dullness, slow
growth, slow development (in walking, speech, teeth, hair),
dizziness, poor memory, deafness, a feeling of emptiness of the
head, blurred vision.
HYPERACTIVITY
The discussion of hyperactivity below is centred on children, but it
is applicable to adults as well.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
Hyperactivity, insomnia, thin body, slow development,
restlessness, propensity to outbursts of anger, clumsiness,
dizziness, dull occipital or vertical headache, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry
hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, headache,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
slightly Wiry pulse.
Qi deficiency of Spleen and Heart with floating Yang
Hyperactivity, fat body, slow development, poor memory, poor
concentration, mental dullness, poor sleep, difficulty in speech,
stuttering, lassitude, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension
after eating, tiredness, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs,
loose stools, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Fire
 
Hyperactivity, thin body, insomnia, headache, red face, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, thirst, bitter
1868
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire
Hyperactivity, expectoration of sputum, catarrh, chronic ‘glue ear’,
poor concentration, a feeling of heaviness, restlessness, difficulty
in speaking, sputum in the throat, chronic catarrh, a feeling of
heat, thirst without a desire to drink, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis leading to obstruction of the upper
orifices
Hyperactivity, mental restlessness, agitation, poor sleep, dark
complexion, history of difficult birth, propensity to outbursts of
anger, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
1869
CHAPTER 81
 
SLEEP PROBLEMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INSOMNIA
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
SOMNOLENCE
SLEEP TALKING
SLEEP WALKING
SNORING
INSOMNIA
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 40
Insomnia includes difficulty in falling or staying asleep.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Insomnia with difficulty in falling asleep, dream-disturbed sleep,
poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, palpitations,
dizziness, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood of the Spleen and Heart 
Insomnia, anxiety, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety,
1870
tendency to be easily startled, palpitations, dizziness, dull-pale
complexion, pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools,
shortness of breath on exertion, slight abdominal distension, poor
appetite, scanty periods, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency
Insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, mental restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and
bothered’, poor memory, palpitations, dry mouth and throat, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating or with rootless
coating, Floating-Empty pulse especially on the left Front position.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Insomnia, difficulty in falling asleep, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-
pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency 
Insomnia, difficulty in falling asleep, dreaming, dizziness,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, blurred vision, floaters in the
eyes, dry eyes, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion but with
red cheekbones, withered and brittle nails, dry skin and hair, night
sweating, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Fine or
Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Insomnia with difficulty in falling asleep, dream-disturbed sleep,
anxiety, poor memory, palpitations, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, night sweating, scanty dark urine,
normal-coloured tongue without coating, dizziness, tinnitus,
backache, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat 
Insomnia, frequent waking during the night, dream-disturbed
1871
sleep, mental restlessness, anxiety, poor memory, palpitations,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal
emissions with dreams, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue
with redder tip and a Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
or a pulse that is Deep and Weak on both Rear positions and
Overflowing on both Front positions.
Liver-Fire 
Insomnia, excessive dreaming, restless sleep, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Restless sleep, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, mental
restlessness, a feeling of agitation, mental confusion, palpitations,
thirst, red face, a feeling of oppression of the chest, dark urine,
expectoration of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste,
Red tongue with redder swollen tip and Heart crack with a sticky
yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Restless sleep, dream-disturbed sleep, mental restlessness, a
feeling of agitation, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
red face, dark urine or blood in the urine, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing and Rapid pulse.
Gall-Bladder deficiency
Tendency to be easily awakened at night and easily startled with
difficulty in going back to sleep or waking up early in the morning,
restless sleep, depression, timidity, tendency to be easily startled,
lack of courage and initiative, indecision, sighing, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, nervousness, Weak pulse.
Residual Heat in the diaphragm
1872
Restless sleep, preference for sleeping propped up, inability to fall
asleep, mental restlessness, a feeling of oppression of the
diaphragm, dry throat, epigastric discomfort, red points in the
front or around the centre of the tongue, slightly Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
If a patient suffers from insomnia and headaches,
these will never improve until the insomnia is treated.
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 40
Liver-Fire
Excessive dreaming, nightmares, restless sleep, headache, red face,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Excessive dreaming, restless sleep, mental restlessness, a feeling of
agitation, insomnia, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers,
a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip
and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Excessive dreaming, restless sleep, insomnia, waking up from
nightmares, mental restlessness, agitation, mental confusion,
palpitations, thirst, red face, a 
feeling of oppression of the chest,
dark urine, expectoration of phlegm, bitter taste, insomnia, Red
tongue with redder swollen tip and a Heart crack with a sticky
yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire in the Stomach
Excessive dreaming, restless sleep, insomnia, mental restlessness,
1873
burning epigastric pain, thirst without a desire to drink, bleeding
gums, dry stools, dry mouth, mouth ulcers, sour regurgitation,
nausea, vomiting soon after eating, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, a feeling of oppression of the chest and
epigastrium, mucus in the stools, expectoration of phlegm, Red
tongue with a sticky yellow coating and a Stomach crack with a
rough, sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid and slightly
Overflowing pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Dream-disturbed sleep with dreams that are not too agitated, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental
restlessness, uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, palpitations,
dry mouth and throat, thirst with a desire to sip fluids, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat,
Red tongue redder on the tip with no coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dream-disturbed sleep, insomnia, depression, a feeling of
aimlessness, dizziness, numbness of the limbs, blurred vision,
‘floaters’ in the eyes, dry eyes, diminished night vision, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion without
‘spirit’ but with red cheekbones, muscular weakness, cramps,
withered and brittle nails, very dry hair and skin, a feeling of heat
in the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, thirst with a desire
to sip fluids, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
slightly Rapid pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat 
Dream-disturbed sleep, palpitations, mental restlessness,
insomnia, anxiety, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus, deafness,
backache, nocturnal emissions with dreams, a feeling of heat in
the evening, night sweating, five-palm heat, scanty dark urine, dry
stools, Red tongue with redder tip without coating and midline
Heart crack, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse, or Deep-Weak pulse
on both Rear positions and relatively Overflowing on both Front
1874
positions.
Heart and Gall-Bladder deficiency
Excessive dreaming, waking up easily from dreaming,
absentmindedness, emotional instability, anxiety and palpitations.
Box 81.1
 
is a list of dreams and the patterns that cause them,
according to the ‘Simple Questions’ and ‘Spiritual Axis’.
 
BOX 81.1
 
   
 
Dreams and their signiﬁcance
• 
 
flying: Emptiness in the Lower Burner
 
1
• 
 
falling: Fullness in the Lower Burner
 
2
• 
 
floods and fear: Excess of Yin
 
3
• 
 
fire: Excess of Yang
 
4
• 
 
killing and destruction: Yin and Yang both in Excess
 
5
• 
 
giving away things: Excess condition
 
6
• 
 
receiving things: Deficiency condition
 
7
• 
 
being angry: Liver in Excess
 
8
• 
 
crying, weeping: Lungs in Excess
 
9
• 
 
crowds: roundworms in the intestines
 
10
• 
 
attack and destruction: tapeworms in the intestines
 
11
• 
 
fires: Heart deficiency
 
12
• 
 
volcanic eruptions (if the dream takes place in
summer): Heart deficiency
 
13
• 
 
laughing: Heart in Excess
 
14
• 
 
mountains, fire and smoke: Heart deficiency
 
15
• 
 
very fragrant mushrooms: Liver deficiency
 
16
• 
 
lying under a tree being unable to get up (if the
dream takes place in spring): Liver deficiency
 
17
• 
 
forests on mountains: Liver deficiency
 
18
• 
 
white objects or bloody killings: Lung deficiency
 
19
• 
 
battles and war (dream taking place in the autumn):
Lung deficiency
 
20
• 
 
worry, fear, crying, flying: Lungs in Excess
 
21
• 
 
flying and seeing strange objects made of gold or
iron: Lung deficiency
 
22
• 
 
being hungry: Spleen deficiency
 
23
• 
 
building a house (dream taking place in late
1875
summer): Spleen deficiency
 
24
• 
 
singing and feeling very heavy: Spleen in Excess
 
25
• 
 
abysses in mountains and marshes: Spleen deficiency
26
• 
 
swimming after a shipwreck: Kidney deficiency
 
27
• 
 
plunging into water and being scared (dream taking
place in winter): Kidney deficiency
 
28
• 
 
spine being detached from the body: Kidneys in
Excess (i.e. Dampness in Kidneys)
 
29
• 
 
being immersed in water: Kidney deficiency
 
30
• 
 
having a large meal: Stomach deficiency
 
31
• 
 
large cities: Small Intestine deficiency
 
32
• 
 
open fields: Large Intestine deficiency
 
33
• 
 
fights, trials, suicide: Gall-Bladder deficiency
 
34
• 
 
voyages: Bladder deficiency
 
35
• 
 
crossing the sea and being scared: Excess of Yin
 
36
SOMNOLENCE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 44
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Dampness
Somnolence especially after a meal, tiredness, a feeling of
heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling of heaviness of the
limbs, poor appetite, epigastric fullness, sticky taste, absence of
thirst, loose stools, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale and wet
tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
This is the most common cause of somnolence.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
Somnolence, poor memory, slight depression, mental confusion, a
feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, dizziness, poor appetite, slight abdominal
distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale complexion,
weakness of the limbs, loose stools, tendency to obesity, Pale-
1876
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery-Weak pulse.
Spleen- and Heart-Qi deficiency
Somnolence, poor memory, slight depression, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, palpitations,
shortness of breath on exertion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Somnolence, poor memory, lower backache, cold knees, a feeling of
cold, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness, lassitude,
abundant clear urination, urination at night, impotence, decreased
libido, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
I use Du-20 Baihui for somnolence.
SLEEP TALKING
Heart-Fire
Talking or shouting in one’s sleep, restless sleep, dream-disturbed
sleep with dreams of laughing and fires, insomnia, palpitations,
thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness, a feeling of
agitation, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with
redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Talking in one’s sleep, waking up during the night, dream-
disturbed sleep with dreams of laughing and fires, palpitations,
insomnia, poor memory, anxiety, mental restlessness, dry mouth
and throat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, night
sweating, five-palm heat, Red tongue with redder tip and without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency
1877
Talking in one’s sleep, excessive dreaming, a feeling of floating just
before falling asleep, insomnia, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
night sweating, dry eyes, dry hair, dry nails, tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Talking in one’s sleep, excessive dreaming, a feeling of floating just
before falling asleep, insomnia, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
night sweating, dry eyes, dry hair, dry nails, five-palm heat, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Gall-Bladder Heat
Talking in one’s sleep, dizziness, tinnitus, bitter taste, dry throat,
irritability, red face and ears, hypochondrial fullness, tongue with
unilateral or bilateral yellow coating, Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Talking in one’s sleep, restless sleep, burning epigastric pain,
thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Talking in one’s sleep, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, poor
memory, anxiety, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or
Fine pulse.
SLEEP WALKING
Liver-Yin deficiency
Sleep walking, excessive dreaming, a feeling of floating just before
falling asleep, insomnia, dizziness, blurred 
vision, floaters, dry
eyes, night sweating, dry hair, dry nails, tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
1878
Sleep walking, excessive dreaming, a feeling of floating just before
falling asleep, insomnia, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, night
sweating, dry eyes, dry hair, dry nails, five-palm heat, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Sleep walking, excessive dreaming, mental restlessness, abdominal
pain, painful periods, Purple tongue, Firm pulse.
SNORING
Hearing
 
, 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 83
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Loud snoring, dry throat, thirst with no desire to drink, barking
cough with profuse, sticky yellow or green sputum, shortness of
breath, wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of
heat, thirst, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Soft snoring, a feeling of oppression of the chest, cough with
expectoration of sticky sputum, a feeling of heaviness, thirst with
no desire to drink, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs
High-pitched snoring, dry cough with occasional, difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum, thirst with no desire to drink, dry
mouth and throat, Swollen tongue with sticky, dry coating,
Slippery pulse.
Phlegm in the Lungs with Lung- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency
Soft snoring, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of
heaviness, weak voice, tendency to catch colds, poor appetite, loose
1879
stools, tiredness, Pale tongue with teeth marks, Soggy pulse.
NOTES
1. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:102 First
published c. 100
BC
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
4. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
5. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
6. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
7. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
8. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
9. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
10. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine – Simple
Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s
Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 102.
11. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine – Simple
Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s
Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 103.
1880
12. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine – Simple
Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s
Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 569.
13. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine – Simple
Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s
Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 569.
14. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:84 First published c. 100
BC
15. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 84.
16. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
17. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
18. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
19. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
20. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
21. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
22. 
Simple Questions, p. 85.
23. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
24. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
25. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
26. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
27. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
28. 
Simple Questions, p. 569.
29. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
30. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
31. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
32. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
33. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
34. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
35. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
36. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 85
1881
CHAPTER 82
 
FEELING OF
COLD, FEELING OF
HEAT, FEVER
CHAPTER CONTENTS
FEELING OF COLD, SHIVERING
    
Exterior
Interior
FEVER
    
Acute fever
Chronic fever
Tidal fever
Fever in cancer
Fever after chemotherapy
FIVE-PALM HEAT
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT
1882
FEELING OF COLD, SHIVERING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 43
Exterior
Invasion of exterior Wind
Aversion to cold, hot dorsum of the hands, fever, occipital
stiffness, occipital headache, Floating pulse.
Lesser-Yang pattern
Alternation of cold and hot feeling, mental restlessness, bitter
taste, dry throat, blurred vision, hypochondrial discomfort,
unilateral tongue coating, Wiry pulse.
Lesser-Yang pattern with predominance of Heat
Alternation of cold and hot feeling with a predominance of the
latter, sweating, a feeling of oppression of the chest, vomiting,
headache, mental restlessness, dry mouth, dark urine, Red tongue
with a unilateral sticky yellow coating, Wiry pulse.
This is also a Lesser-Yang pattern but with the predominance of
Heat and with some Dampness. Within the Four Levels
identification of patterns, it is called Heat in the Gall-Bladder.
Exterior Cold and interior Heat
Aversion to cold, fever, cold limbs, body aches, headache, thirst,
mental restlessness, dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue.
This situation occurs after an invasion of external Wind when
interior Heat is generated but the exterior Cold is still there; thus
exterior Cold and interior Heat coexist. This pattern is not
common.
Long-lasting invasion of Wind-Heat
Aversion to cold, fever, sweating, hot dorsum of the hands. The
pulse becomes quiet after sweating, the patient desires to lie down
1883
and the limbs are cold.
Interior
Internal Cold
Cold feeling, no fever, dorsum of the hands not hot, cold feet, cold
limbs.
Deficiency of Yang of the Heart/Lungs
Cold hands, a feeling of cold, shortness of breath, palpitations,
Weak pulse.
Yang deficiency of the Stomach and Spleen
Cold limbs and abdomen, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, bright-white complexion, loose stools, a
feeling of cold, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Cold legs, knees, feet and back, lower backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Qi stagnation
Cold hands and feet (especially fingers and toes), irritability,
depression, hypochondrial discomfort, sighing, Wiry pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Cold hands, a feeling of cold, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia,
poor memory, anxiety, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy
or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency 
Cold feet and hands, a feeling of cold, dizziness, blurred vision,
floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
1884
Phlegm in the Interior
A feeling of cold, cold limbs, a feeling of heaviness of the limbs, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, Slippery
pulse.
Often Phlegm may cause a cold feeling and cold limbs because it
may obstruct the circulation of the Defensive Qi; this may happen
even in the case of Phlegm-Heat and may account for contradictory
hot and cold signs.
Heat stagnating in the Interior (True Heat–False Cold)
A feeling of cold, cold limbs, thirst, mental restlessness, dry throat,
dry stools, red tongue, deep pulse.
This is due to interior Heat blocking Yang Qi in the Interior so
that it cannot extend towards the Exterior; however, this situation
is quite rare.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Apart from obvious differences in patterns, the cold
feeling from exterior invasions manifests with typical
‘waves’ of feelings of cold and shivering.
FEVER
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 43
Acute Fever
In acute fevers the identification of patterns according to the Four
Levels provides the best framework of interpretation. Within the
Four Levels, the Defensive-Qi level is the only exterior one and
therefore there is fever and shivering with a slight feeling of cold
simultaneously. At the other three levels (Qi, Nutritive Qi and
Blood), Heat is in the Interior and the fever is interior. The
identification of patterns according to the Four Levels describes
the symptomatology of invasions of Wind-Heat. However, fever, to
a lesser degree, may be present also in invasions of Wind-Cold, for
1885
which the identification of patterns according to the Six Stages is
used.
Invasion of external Wind-Heat in the Lungs Defensive-
Qi portion
Fever with a slight aversion to cold, cough, sore throat, stuffed or
runny nose with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight
sweating, slight thirst, swollen tonsils, tongue slightly Red on the
sides in the chest area or on the front part, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of external Wind-Cold
A slight fever with a pronounced cold feeling and possibly
shivering, cough, itchy throat, slight breathlessness, stuffed or
runny nose with clear watery discharge, 
sneezing, occipital
headache, body aches, thin white tongue coating, Floating-Tight
pulse.
Invasion of Summer-Heat
Fever, a slight feeling of cold, absence of sweating, headache, a
feeling of heaviness, an uncomfortable feeling of the epigastrium,
irritability, thirst, Red tongue, with white coating, Weak-Floating
and Rapid pulse.
Heat in the Lungs (Qi level)
Fever, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache,
flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang – channel pattern
Fever, sweating, intense thirst, burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour
regurgitation, nausea, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds to Heat in the Stomach channel and is
described by the Stomach-Heat level within the Four Levels or the
Bright-Yang channel pattern within the Six Stages.
Heat in Bright Yang – organ pattern
1886
Fever, burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink
cold liquids, mental restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools,
abdominal pain, tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating,
Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
This is Dry-Heat in the Intestines level within the Four Levels
and is the same as the Bright-Yang organ pattern within the Six
Stages.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Intestines
Low-grade fever, sweating which does not relieve the fever and
does not lead to the clearing of Heat, a feeling of fullness of the
epigastrium/abdomen, epigastric/abdominal pain, poor appetite,
sticky taste, a feeling of heaviness of the body, thirst without a
desire to drink, nausea, vomiting, loose stools with offensive
odour, burning sensation of the anus, a feeling of heat, scanty dark
urine, headache with a feeling of heaviness of the head, dull-yellow
complexion like tangerine peel, yellow sclera of the eyes, oily
sweat, bitter taste, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Heat at Nutritive-Qi level
Fever at night, thirst, dry mouth with no desire to drink, mental
restlessness.
This is Heat at the Nutritive-Qi level within the Four Levels.
Heat at Blood level
Fever at night, thirst, mental restlessness, macular rash, bleeding.
This is Heat in the Blood level within the Four Levels.
Chronic Fever
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the afternoon or evening, five-
palm heat, malar flush, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
dry mouth and throat at night, mental restlessness, night
sweating, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, dry stools, scanty dark
urination, a thin red line on the inside of the lower eyelid, Red
1887
tongue without coating and with cracks, Fine-Rapid pulse.
These are the general symptoms of Empty-Heat deriving from
Yin deficiency; they may arise from the Lungs, Heart, Stomach,
Spleen, Liver or Kidneys.
Qi deficiency
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat that is aggravated by overwork,
dizziness, tiredness, depression, muscular weakness, spontaneous
sweating, shortness of breath, loose stools, poor appetite, weak
voice, Pale tongue, Weak or Empty pulse.
Blood deficiency 
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the afternoon, dizziness,
blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty
menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat rebelling upwards
Chronic low-grade fever or feeling of heat that comes and goes
according to the emotional state (it comes when the person is
upset), volatile mood, irritability, a feeling of distension of the
chest and hypochondrium, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, premenstrual tension, a bitter taste, tongue Red on the
sides and thin yellow coating, Rapid-Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis
Low-grade fever or feeling of heat in the afternoon or evening,
abdominal pain, dry skin and nails, dark 
complexion, purple lips,
Purple tongue, Choppy or Firm pulse.
Tidal Fever
Tidal fever is a fever that rises and decreases at regular intervals. It
is usually seen only in interior patterns.
Yin deficiency
Fever that is higher in the afternoon or only in the afternoon, hot
1888
palms and soles, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink
in small sips, dry throat in the evening, scanty dark urine, dry
stools, normal-coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Fever in the mornings, decreasing in the afternoon, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension after eating, an uncomfortable
sensation of the epigastrium, tiredness, lassitude, pale
complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
This pattern is relatively rare and is due to a severe deficiency of
Stomach and Spleen Qi occurring after a febrile disease. It was
described by Li Dong Yuan in his ‘Discussion of Stomach and
Spleen’ (see Bibliography) and for which he used the famous
prescription Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting
Qi Decoction
 
. This condition is what he called Yin Fire, which is not
Full-Heat nor Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency but a kind of
Empty-Heat from Qi deficiency.
Blood stasis
Fever in the afternoon or night, dry throat, abdominal pain, dry
skin and nails, dark rings under the eyes, Purple tongue, Choppy
or Wiry pulse.
This is unusual and it is more likely to occur in the elderly; it is
often seen in the late stages of cancer due to Blood stasis.
Bright-Yang organ pattern
Fever that is higher in the afternoon, sweating of the hands and
feet, abdominal pain and fullness, constipation, Red tongue and
black tongue coating, Deep-Full pulse.
This is the Bright-Yang organ pattern within the Six Stages
identification of patterns.
Summer-Heat 
Fever in the morning, cold feeling at dusk or vice versa, thirst,
irritability.
1889
This corresponds to invasion of Summer-Heat injuring Qi. This
occurs only in children and is relatively rare.
Fever In Cancer
Fever in cancer may present with symptoms that are different from
the norm and may also be caused by patterns that do not normally
cause fever such as Liver-Qi stagnation and Yang deficiency.
Blood stasis
Fever, cancer characterized by pain and a mass, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
This may be cancer of the stomach, lung, intestines, uterus or
breast.
Phlegm
Fever in the afternoon, cancer characterized by relatively soft
masses, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
This may be cancer of the breast, lymphoma, Hodgkin’s disease
or thyroid cancer.
Damp-Heat
Afternoon fever, which may be high with delirium, headache,
night sweating, mental restlessness, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, oedema, nausea, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
This may be cancer of the bladder, intestines, prostate or skin.
Toxic Heat
High fever, shivers, whole body hot to touch, cancer mass growing
rapidly, purulent discharges, dark complexion, Red tongue with
red points and thick, sticky, dry brown coating, Overflowing-Rapid
pulse.
This may be cancer of oesophagus, lungs, stomach, intestines,
breast or uterus.
1890
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Low-grade afternoon fever, late stage of cancer, five-palm heat,
night sweating, malar flush, Red tongue without coating, Fine-
Rapid pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat rebelling upwards
Low-grade afternoon fever, breast cancer, irritability,
hypochondrial distension, sighing, Wiry pulse, tongue with Red
sides.
Heat in Nutritive-Qi level
High fever, delirium, stage of rapid deterioration, mental
confusion, maculae, dark-Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid
pulse.
Yang deficiency
Midday low-grade fever, late stage of cancer, tiredness, chilliness,
Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Fever After Chemotherapy
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Low-grade fever, with no sweating, starts 3–5 days after the end of
chemotherapy, Purple tongue, Wiry-Slow pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Low-grade fever in the afternoon, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Blood-Heat
Low-grade fever, thirst, mouth ulcers, blood in urine, red
complexion, Red tongue, Rapid pulse.
FIVE-PALM HEAT
1891
This is a feeling of heat in the palms, soles and chest, which is also
sometimes called five-centre heat or five-heart heat. It may or may
not be accompanied by an actual fever. It is usually accompanied
by mental restlessness, night sweating and insomnia. This is
frequently seen in practice; however, it may sometimes manifest
only in the soles and palms, or in the palms and chest.
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Five-palm heat in the afternoon, a desire to grasp cold objects, a
desire to stretch hands and feet out of the blankets, dry throat at
night, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, malar flush,
insomnia, anxiety, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
This can be Yin deficiency of the Lungs, Heart, Liver, Kidneys,
Stomach or Spleen.
Blood deficiency 
Five-palm heat in the afternoon which is worse when tense or
tired, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of
limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood deficiency, like Yin deficiency, may also cause Empty-Heat
and it usually occurs only in women, especially after the age of 40.
Liver-Fire 
Five-palm heat, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability,
propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Although five-palm heat is nearly always associated with Yin
deficiency, it may also be caused by Liver-Fire, but this is not
common.
Latent Heat in Lesser Yin
Five-palm heat, low-grade fever, cold in the morning and hot at
dusk, mental restlessness, insomnia, Red tongue without coating.
 
Clinical note
1892
• 
 
Although five-palm heat involves three areas (the
chest, the palms and the soles), the clinical significance
would be the same if only two areas are involved, e.g.
chest and palms, or chest and soles, or palms and soles.
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF
COLD AND HEAT
Simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang with prevalence of Kidney-Yin
Dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, malar flush, a feeling of heat in
the evening, but possibly also cold feet.
Simultaneous deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang with prevalence of Kidney-Yang
Dizziness, backache, tinnitus, frequent urination, a pronounced
feeling of cold, cold feet, but possibly also a feeling of heat in the
afternoon.
Blood deficiency 
Cold hands or feet, a feeling of cold, blurred vision, dizziness,
tingling, dull ache in hands and feet, a feeling of heat in the face.
Disharmony of the Penetrating Vessel 
Cold feet, a feeling of heat in the face, palpitations, anxiety, a
feeling of tightness of the chest, a feeling of energy rising from the
abdomen, irregular periods, painful period, Firm pulse.
Coexistence of a Heat and a Cold pattern in different
organs
Example:
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Heart-Heat
 
Lower backache, a
feeling of cold in the back or generally, cold feet, frequent pale
1893
urination, dizziness, anxiety, red face, a feeling of heat in the face,
insomnia, palpitations, Pale tongue but with a Red tip, Deep-Weak
pulse.
This is just an example of a coexistence of a Cold and Heat
pattern. This situation may arise in connection with many other
organs, for example Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Yang rising,
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Heart-Heat, Kidney-Yang deficiency
with Damp-Heat in the Bladder, Spleen-Yang deficiency with Liver-
Fire, Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm-Heat, etc.
Lesser-Yang pattern (Six Stages)
Alternation of aversion to cold and fever, bitter taste, dry throat,
blurred vision, hypochondrial fullness and distension, absence of
desire to eat or drink, irritability, nausea, vomiting, unilateral thin
white tongue coating, Wiry-Fine pulse.
Gall-Bladder Heat (Four Levels)
Alternating hot and cold feeling with a prevalence of heat, bitter
taste, thirst, dry throat, hypochondrial pain, nausea, a feeling of
fullness in the epigastrium, Red tongue with unilateral sticky
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In women over the age of 45, a simultaneous
deficiency of Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang is more the
rule than the exception.
1894
CHAPTER 83
 
VOICE, SPEECH
AND SOUNDS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LOUD VOICE 
819
WEAK VOICE 
820
MUFFLED VOICE 
820
HOARSE VOICE 
820
NASAL VOICE 
820
SNORING 
821
SLURRED SPEECH 
821
INCOHERENT, INCESSANT SPEECH 
821
MUTTERING TO ONESELF 
821
DELIRIOUS SPEECH 
822
DIFFICULTY IN FINDING WORDS 
822
STUTTERING 
822
GROANING 
822
CRYING OUT 
822
LOUD VOICE
1895
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Heart-Fire
Loud voice, speaking a lot, speech punctuated by frequent bursts
of laughter, palpitations, thirst, agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire 
Loud voice with a trembling, angry sound, headaches, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face,
thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Loud voice which comes and goes according to the emotional
state, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Lung-Heat
Loud voice, cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest
ache, flaring of the nostrils, thirst, red face, Red tongue with yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Trembling, loud voice sounding as if the person is on the brink of
tears, sighing, sadness, worry, depression, slight breathlessness, a
feeling of tightness of the chest.
WEAK VOICE
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Lung-Qi deficiency
Weak voice, dislike of speaking, slight shortness of breath,
spontaneous daytime sweating, bright-white complexion, tendency
1896
to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Weak voice, dislike of speaking, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weak, slightly groaning voice, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a
feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Severe depletion of Qi
Very feeble voice with speech frequently interrupted, great
difficulty in starting to speak again after stopping, exhaustion, Pale
tongue with teethmarks, Weak-Hidden pulse.
MUFFLED VOICE
Invasion of Wind
Muffled voice with acute onset, nasal sound, aversion to cold,
fever, headache, body aches, Floating pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether it is Wind-Heat
or Wind-Cold.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Muffled voice with slow onset, weak voice, poor appetite, loose
stools, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale
complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
HOARSE VOICE
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Invasion of Wind-Heat
1897
Hoarse voice with acute onset, sore throat, aversion to cold, fever,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red
sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Liver/Lung-Qi stagnation
Hoarse voice that comes and goes according to the emotional state,
irritability, depression, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, sighing.
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Hoarse voice with slow onset, dry throat, thirst with a desire to
drink in small sips, dry cough which is worse in the evening, thin
body, breathlessness on exertion, lower backache, night sweating,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty urination, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis
Hoarse voice in a chronic condition, swelling of the pharynx,
sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
abdominal pain, mental restlessness, dark complexion, Reddish-
Purple and Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery
pulse.
Collapse of Yin or Yang
Hoarse voice with sudden onset in the course of a serious, chronic
disease. Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is
collapse of Yin or collapse of Yang.
Kidney channel pathology in pregnancy 
Hoarse voice towards the end of term; this is due to pathology in
the Kidney Connecting channel from the Uterus to the throat and
it does not require treatment.
NASAL VOICE
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
1898
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Nasal voice with sudden onset, itchy throat, aversion to cold, fever,
occipital headache, stiff neck, sneezing, body aches, tongue with
thin white coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Dampness
Nasal voice with sudden onset, aversion to cold, fever, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, nausea, epigastric pain, vomiting, body
aches, tongue with sticky white coating, Floating-Slippery pulse.
Phlegm in the nasal passages
Nasal voice, blocked nose, snoring, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, a feeling of heaviness, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue
with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Dampness in the nasal passages
Nasal voice, blocked nose, facial pain, sinusitis, sticky taste, a
feeling of heaviness, sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency with
Phlegm/Dampness in the nasal passages
Nasal voice, blocked nose, runny nose in the morning, chronic
sinusitis, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
tendency to catch colds, Pale and Swollen tongue with teethmarks
and a sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
A nasal voice is relatively common in children with
residual Dampness in the sinuses.
SNORING
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs
 
, 
Chapter 81
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
1899
Loud snoring, dry throat, thirst with no desire to drink, barking
cough with profuse, sticky yellow sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat,
thirst, Red and Swollen tongue with a sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Soft snoring, a feeling of oppression of the chest, cough with
expectoration of sticky sputum, a feeling of heaviness, sputum in
the throat, thirst with no desire to drink, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Dry-Phlegm in the Lungs
High-pitched snoring, dry cough with occasional, difficult
expectoration of scanty sputum, thirst with no desire to drink, dry
mouth and throat, Swollen tongue with sticky dry coating, Slippery
pulse.
Phlegm in the Lungs with Lung- and Spleen-Qi
deficiency
Soft snoring, a feeling of oppression of the chest, feeling of
heaviness, weak voice, tendency to catch colds, poor appetite, loose
stools, tiredness, Pale tongue with teethmarks, Soggy pulse.
SLURRED SPEECH
Phlegm
Slurred speech, difficulty in finding words, inverting words, a
feeling of heaviness of the head, dizziness, blurred vision, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Wind-Phlegm 
Slurred speech following a stroke, hemiplegia, severe dizziness,
blurred vision, tremors, unilateral numbness of a limbs, tinnitus,
nausea, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
1900
Stiff or Deviated and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency 
Slurred speech, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-
pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
INCOHERENT, INCESSANT SPEECH
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Incoherent, incessant speech, agitation, mental confusion,
palpitations, manic behaviour, mental restlessness, thirst, red face,
a feeling of oppression of the chest, dark urine, expectoration of
phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, Red tongue with redder swollen tip and Heart
crack with a sticky yellow coating inside it, Slippery-Rapid or
Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
MUTTERING TO ONESELF
Phlegm obstructing the Mind’s orifices
Muttering to oneself, mental confusion, sputum in the throat, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky
coating, Slippery pulse.
DELIRIOUS SPEECH
Heat in the Pericardium
Delirious speech, fever at night, mental confusion, incoherent
speech or aphasia, delirium, body hot, cold hands and feet,
macules, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
1901
DIFFICULTY IN FINDING WORDS
Phlegm
Difficulty in finding words, inverting words, a feeling of heaviness
and muzziness of the head, dizziness, blurred vision, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Heart-Blood deficiency
Difficulty in finding words, poor concentration, palpitations,
dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety,
tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale
and Thin tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Difficulty in finding words, dizziness, tinnitus, poor memory,
lower backache.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is Kidney-
Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
STUTTERING
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Heart-Blood deficiency
Stuttering, nervous tension, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia,
dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily
startled, dull-pale complexion, pale lips, Pale and Thin tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Heart-Fire
Stuttering, palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental
restlessness, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with
redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1902
GROANING
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Dampness
Groaning, acute pain, a feeling of heaviness, tongue with thick
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the location of the
Dampness causing the pain.
Qi stagnation
Groaning, acute pain and distension, Wiry pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the location of the Qi
stagnation causing the pain.
CRYING OUT
Hearing,
 
Chapter 53
Blood stasis
Crying out, severe, acute pain which is stabbing in character, Wiry
pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on the location of the Blood
stasis causing the pain.
Damp-Heat
Crying out, severe, acute pain, a feeling of fullness and heaviness,
thick, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Toxic Heat
Crying out, severe, acute pain, a feeling of heat, swelling and
redness, thick sticky dark-yellow tongue coating with red spots,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1903
SECTION 2
GYNAECOLOGICAL
SYMPTOMS
AND SIGNS
1904
GYNAECOLOGICAL
SYMPTOMS AND
SIGNS
Section contents
84. 
 
Menstrual symptoms
85. 
 
Problems at period time
86. 
 
Problems during pregnancy
87. 
 
Problems after childbirth
88. 
 
Breast signs
89. 
 
Miscellaneous gynaecological symptoms
INTRODUCTION
This section of 
Part 5
 
lists gynaecological symptoms and signs.
These are extremely important not only in gynaecological
conditions, but also to help us reach a diagnosis in women for non-
gynaecological conditions. Questions about menstrual problems
or problems arising at period time are very important in every
female patient, even after the menopause; this is because, even
after the menopause, we need to find out about the menstrual
1905
history to build a picture of the constitution of the patient.
1906
CHAPTER 84
 
MENSTRUAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
    
Pale menstrual blood
Purple menstrual blood
Menstrual clots
Sticky menstrual blood
Watery menstrual blood
PERIODS
    
Early periods (short cycle)
Late periods (long cycle)
Irregular periods
Heavy periods
Scanty periods
1907
Painful periods
Absence of periods
Mid-cycle bleeding
Periods that stop and start
Periods that return after the menopause
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
Pale Menstrual Blood
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood deficiency
Pale and dilute menstrual blood, scanty periods, dull-pale
complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Choppy pulse.
Qi deficiency
Pale menstrual blood, heavy bleeding, shortness of breath,
tiredness, pale complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Pale and dilute menstrual blood, tiredness, loose stools, poor
appetite, backache, dizziness, a feeling of cold, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Uterus
Pale and sticky menstrual blood, excessive vaginal discharge, a
feeling of heaviness, infertility, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Purple Menstrual Blood
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 46
1908
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in the Uterus
Purple menstrual blood with dark clots, abdominal distension and
pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis with Heat in the Uterus
Reddish-purple menstrual blood, purple clots, abdominal pain,
mental restlessness, thirst, Reddish-Purple tongue, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Blood stasis with Cold in the Uterus
Bluish-purple menstrual blood, small, stringy dark clots,
abdominal pain, a feeling of cold, painful periods alleviated by the
application of heat, Bluish-Purple tongue, Wiry-Tight-Slow pulse.
Blood deficiency with Cold in the Uterus
Pale-purplish menstrual blood, scanty periods, painful periods
alleviated by the application of heat, a feeling of cold, dizziness,
blurred vision, Pale tongue with white coating, Choppy pulse.
Menstrual Clots
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Dark menstrual blood with large dark clots, painful periods
relieved by the passage of clots, periods starting with a brownish
discharge, periods stopping and starting, painful periods, irregular
periods, infertility, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood-Heat
Dark but fresh-looking clots, heavy periods, a feeling of heat, red
face, Red tongue, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Small, stringy clots with bright-red blood, painful periods
alleviated by the application of heat, a feeling of cold during the
1909
periods, dilute menstrual blood, Pale tongue, Deep-Tight pulse.
Qi deficiency
Small, pale-red, fresh-looking clots, heavy periods with bright-red
and dilute blood, pale face, tiredness, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Sticky Menstrual Blood
Interrogation
 
, 
Chapter 46
Damp-Heat in the Uterus
Sticky menstrual blood with offensive odour, excessive vaginal
discharge, hypogastric fullness, vaginal itching, sticky yellow
tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Uterus
Sticky menstrual blood of pale colour, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, dizziness, nausea, excessive vaginal discharge, infertility,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Heart-Fire
Sticky menstrual blood, early periods, heavy periods, mental
restlessness, insomnia, thirst, red face, palpitations, headaches,
bitter taste, burning on urination, Red tongue with redder sides
and tip and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Uterus with Heat
Sticky menstrual blood, dark clots, a feeling of heat, abdominal
pain, painful periods, Reddish-Purple tongue, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Watery Menstrual Blood
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Qi deficiency
Watery pale menstrual blood, heavy periods, tiredness, pale face,
1910
shortness of breath, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood deficiency
Watery menstrual blood, scanty periods, late periods, blurred
vision, dull-pale face, Pale-Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Cold-Dampness in the Uterus
Watery menstrual blood, a feeling of heaviness and cold in the
hypogastrium, painful periods alleviated by the application of
heat, late periods, abdominal pain, excessive vaginal discharge,
sticky white tongue coating, Slippery-Slow or Tight-Slow pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Watery pale menstrual blood, heavy periods, tiredness, a feeling of
cold, backache, loose stools, dizziness, Pale and Swollen tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Watery menstrual blood that is scarlet red, late periods, scanty
periods, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
PERIODS
Early Periods (Short Cycle)
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Qi deficiency
Early periods, heavy bleeding, pale blood, tiredness, poor appetite,
loose stools, pale complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood-Heat
Early period, heavy bleeding, bright-red or dark-red blood, a
feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness, red face, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
1911
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Early periods, scanty periods, dizziness, tinnitus, backache, night
sweating, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Early periods, painful periods with dark blood and clots, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Late Periods (Long Cycle)
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood deficiency
Late period, scanty periods, blurred vision, dizziness, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Late periods, scanty bleeding, painful periods alleviated by the
application of heat, small, stringy dark clots, a feeling of cold, Pale
tongue, Deep-Tight-Slow pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Uterus
Late periods, sticky menstrual blood, a feeling of heaviness,
excessive vaginal discharge, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Late periods, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, tongue without
coating.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a
deficiency of Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang.
Irregular Periods
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
‘Irregular periods’ indicates periods that come sometimes early
and sometimes late. It is important to bear in mind that many
1912
women refer to ‘irregular periods’ when the periods are either
consistently late or consistently early, in which case they fall under
the headings of ‘late periods’ or ‘early periods’ respectively.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Irregular periods, premenstrual tension, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Irregular periods, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, infertility.
Other manifestations, including the pulse and tongue, depend
on whether there is Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Irregular periods, scanty bleeding, pale blood, palpitations,
tiredness, Pale-Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Heavy Periods
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
‘Heavy periods’ indicates heavy menstrual blood that occurs at
the proper time; that is, the period comes regularly, it lasts
approximately 4 or 5 days and the bleeding is heavy during that
time. There is another condition characterized by heavy bleeding
called ‘Flooding and trickling’ (
Beng Lou
 
): this indicates heavy
menstrual blood outside the proper time; that is, the period may
come early with a sudden flood (
Beng
 
), or it may continue with a
trickle after the proper period time (
Lou
 
), or both. The various
pathological conditions indicated below apply to both ‘Heavy
periods’ and ‘Flooding and trickling’.
Qi deficiency
Heavy menstrual bleeding that may come early with a flood, pale
blood, tiredness, pale face, poor appetite, palpitations, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood-Heat
1913
Heavy menstrual bleeding, bright-red or dark-red blood, a feeling
of heat, mental restlessness, red face, 
thirst, Red tongue with
yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Fire
Heavy menstrual bleeding, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Heavy menstrual bleeding, pale blood, irregular periods, backache,
a feeling of cold, loose stools, tiredness, infertility, Pale and
Swollen tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Heavy menstrual bleeding, trickling after the proper time,
irregular periods, infertility, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating,
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Blood Empty-
Heat
Heavy menstrual bleeding, irregular periods, trickling after the
proper time, infertility, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, a
feeling of heat in the evening, five-palm heat, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Heavy menstrual bleeding, painful periods with dark blood and
dark clots, periods that stop and start, abdominal pain, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
In my opinion, most practitioners tend to have a bias
towards Qi deficiency as a cause of heavy menstrual
bleeding. However, in my experience, roughly half the
cases are due to Blood-Heat.
1914
Scanty Periods
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood deficiency
Scanty periods with pale-dilute blood, late periods, dizziness,
blurred vision, Pale-Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Scanty periods with pale blood, late periods, infertility, irregular
periods, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak
knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Scanty periods, irregular periods, late periods, infertility, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small
sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Scanty periods with dark blood and clots, painful periods, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm obstructing the Uterus
Scanty periods with a brownish discharge, excessive vaginal
discharge, a feeling of heaviness, obesity, Swollen tongue, Slippery
pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Scanty periods, late periods, painful periods alleviated by the
application of heat, a feeling of cold, abdominal pain, white tongue
coating, Tight-Slow pulse.
Painful Periods
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
1915
Liver-Qi stagnation
Abdominal distension and pain before or during the periods,
premenstrual tension, distension of the breasts, no clots,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness,
Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe period pain which is alleviated by the passage of clots,
hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Stagnation of Cold in the Uterus
Severe spastic cramp-like menstrual pain that is alleviated by the
application of heat, small, stringy clots of bright red blood, a
feeling of cold during the period, Pale tongue, Deep-Tight pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Uterus
Painful periods with a feeling of heaviness extending to the
sacrum, mid-cycle pain, small red clots, excessive vaginal
discharge, dark urine, Red tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning to Liver-Fire
Painful periods, heavy periods, irritability, thirst, bitter taste, dry
stools, Red tongue with redder sides and yellow coating, Rapid-
Wiry pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Dull menstrual pain towards the end of or after the period, pain
relieved by pressure, scanty periods, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale
complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Spleen-Yang and Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull period pain during or after the period, scanty bleeding
without clots, dull headache, blurred vision, tiredness, loose
1916
stools, Pale and Swollen tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dull period pain during or after the period, scanty period,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Absence Of Periods
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood deficiency
Menstruation stops after several months of decreasing periods,
blurred vision, dizziness, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver and Kidney deficiency
Menstruation not started by the age of 18, or stopped after
becoming scanty, backache, dizziness, tiredness.
Other manifestations, including pulse and tongue, depend on
whether there is Kidney-Yin or Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Absence of periods, tiredness, loose stools, backache, dizziness, a
feeling of cold, Pale and swollen tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Absence of periods, dizziness, tinnitus, backache, blurred vision,
dry eyes, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
This is usually secondary amenorrhoea in older women.
Lung-Yin and Blood deficiency
Absence of periods, dry cough, shortness of breath, malar flush,
depression, sighing, dizziness, sadness, tongue without coating in
the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
1917
Absence of periods, palpitations, insomnia, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, depression, anxiety, night sweating, Red tongue with
redder tip and without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Absence of periods, palpitations, depression, insomnia, pale-dull
complexion, tiredness, loose stools, poor appetite, Pale tongue,
Weak or Choppy pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Periods that stop suddenly, irritability, abdominal distension and
pain, depression, Wiry pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Uterus
Periods that stop after gradually decreasing in amount, obesity,
excessive vaginal discharge, a feeling of heaviness, abdominal
fullness, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Mid-Cycle Bleeding
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Mid-cycle bleeding that is scanty, scarlet-red blood, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, backache, five-palm heat, malar flush,
Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat
Mid-cycle bleeding that may be heavy or scanty, sticky blood,
fatigue, ache in the joints, a feeling of heaviness, poor appetite,
vaginal discharge, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Blood stasis
Mid-cycle bleeding with pain, scanty blood, dark blood with dark
clots, abdominal pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
1918
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Mid-cycle bleeding that may be profuse, dilute bright-red blood,
dizziness, tinnitus, backache, loose stools, tiredness, depression, a
feeling of cold, frequent urination, Pale and Swollen tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Periods That Stop And Start
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Periods that stop and start, painful periods with dark blood and
clots, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Periods that stop and start, painful periods with small, stringy
dark clots, scanty periods, abdominal pain alleviated by the
application of heat, white tongue coating, Deep-Tight pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Periods that stop and start, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Periods That Return After The Menopause
This symptom occurs only in menopausal women, when the
periods stop for at least a year and then suddenly return; in
ancient times this was called ‘inverted opening flower’.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty Heat
Periods that return suddenly after 1 year of climacterium, scanty in
volume, fresh red blood, malar flush, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, insomnia, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
five-palm heat, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Liver-Fire
Periods that return suddenly after 1 year of climacterium, heavy
1919
period, dark-red blood with red clots, propensity to outbursts of
anger, thirst, bitter taste, insomnia, Red tongue with redder sides
and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Periods that return suddenly after 1 year of climacterium, heavy
period, dilute bright-red blood, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Toxic Heat in the Uterus
Periods that return suddenly after 1 year of climacterium, bloody
vaginal discharge with offensive odour, five-colour vaginal
discharge, foul breath, constipation, Red tongue with sticky yellow
coating and red spots, Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
This condition may correspond to carcinoma of the uterus in
Western medicine; therefore a bloody vaginal discharge with
offensive odour in a woman after the menopause always requires a
gynaecological examination.
1920
CHAPTER 85
 
PROBLEMS AT
PERIOD TIME
CHAPTER CONTENTS
PREMENSTRUAL TENSION
HEADACHE
BREAST DISTENSION
FEVER
BODY ACHES
OEDEMA
DIARRHOEA
CONSTIPATION
NOSEBLEED
MOUTH ULCERS
SKIN ERUPTIONS
DIZZINESS
VOMITING
INSOMNIA
EYE PAIN
1921
PREMENSTRUAL TENSION
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver-Qi stagnation
Irritability, depression, moodiness, propensity to outbursts of
anger, impatience, irregular periods, breast distension,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a feeling of a lump in the
throat, Wiry pulse.
Liver- and Heart-Fire
Propensity to outbursts of anger, irritability, mental restlessness,
shouting, anxiety, insomnia, breast distension, heavy periods, a
feeling of heat, headache, red face, dizziness, tinnitus, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, palpitations, mouth and tongue
ulcers, Red tongue with redder sides and tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Mental restlessness, anxiety, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep,
breast distension, heavy periods, palpitations, thirst, mouth and
tongue ulcers, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing upwards
Mental restlessness, anxiety, insomnia, hyperactivity, dream-
disturbed sleep, mental confusion, breast distension, swelling and
pain, a feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head, a feeling of
heat, red face, greasy skin, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
sputum in the throat, expectoration of yellow sputum, dizziness,
nausea, Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency with secondary Liver-Qi
stagnation
Weepiness, crying, depression, mild irritability, mild breast
distension, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling
1922
of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Weepiness, crying, depression, lack of motivation, insomnia,
scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, dizziness, tinnitus, lower
backache, dull occipital or vertical headache, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat in the evening, dry
hair and skin, brittle nails, night sweating, dry stools, normal-
coloured tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Weepiness, crying, depression, lack of motivation, tiredness,
lassitude, scanty or heavy periods, lower backache, a sensation of
cold in the back, a feeling of cold, bright-white complexion,
decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear or scanty
clear urination, urination at night, apathy, oedema of the lower
legs, loose stools, poor appetite, slight abdominal distension, a
desire to lie down, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness and secondary
Liver-Qi stagnation
Weepiness, depression, tiredness, lassitude, feeling of heaviness,
swelling of the breasts, mild irritability, poor appetite, slight
abdominal distension after eating, pale complexion, weak limbs,
loose stools, abdominal fullness, sticky taste, nausea, excessive
vaginal discharge, Pale tongue with sticky coating, Soggy pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: premenstrual tension is not always due to
a Liver disharmony. For example, Heart-Fire can also
cause it.
HEADACHE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
1923
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull vertical headache during or after the period, scanty period,
dizziness, blurred vision, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Yang rising
Throbbing headache on the temples before or during the period,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
red face, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Fire
Throbbing headache on the temples or eyes during the period,
bloodshot eyes, red face, thirst, bitter taste, headaches, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis
Stabbing headache on the temples during the period, painful
periods with dark blood and clots, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
BREAST DISTENSION
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver-Qi stagnation
Premenstrual breast distension, hypochondrial or epigastric
distension, irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Premenstrual breast distension and pain, painful period with dark
blood and clots, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, dark
complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm with stagnation of Qi
Premenstrual breast distension, breast nodularity, swollen and
painful breasts, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sighing,
1924
obesity, Swollen tongue, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Liver-Qi
stagnation
Slight premenstrual breast distension, scanty periods, dizziness,
tinnitus, irregular periods, tongue without coating, Fine and
slightly Wiry pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning to Liver-Fire
Premenstrual breast distension and pain, abdominal distension,
bitter taste, thirst, insomnia, irritability, Red tongue with redder
sides and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Qi
stagnation
Slight premenstrual breast distension, late periods, irregular
periods, infertility, backache, dizziness, tiredness, loose stools, Pale
and Swollen tongue, Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight breast distension before or during the period, irregular
periods, dizziness, tinnitus, blurred vision, backache, pale face,
Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
Premenstrual breast distension, a feeling of oppression or
distension of the chest, slight breathlessness, sighing, a feeling of
a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, sadness, irritability,
depression, tongue slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas,
pulse very slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Phlegm with Lung-Qi stagnation
Phlegm in the throat, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
difficulty in swallowing, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
sputum in the throat, tongue slightly Swollen on the sides in the
1925
chest areas, Slippery pulse that is also very slightly Tight on the
right Front position.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: premenstrual breast distension is not
always due to a Liver disharmony. Stagnation of Lung-Qi
(with or without Phlegm) also affects the breasts.
FEVER
Blood-Heat
Fever before or during the period, heavy period, mental
restlessness, thirst, hot nose, red lips, Red tongue, Rapid-
Overflowing pulse.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Low-grade fever during the period, five-palm heat, night sweating,
mental restlessness, dizziness, tinnitus, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Qi and Blood deficiency with disharmony of Nutritive
and Defensive Qi
Low-grade fever during or after the period, pale complexion,
dizziness, tiredness, Pale-Thin tongue, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Blood stasis in the Uterus
Fever during the period that is worse in the evening, painful
periods, dark blood with clots, Purple tongue, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
BODY ACHES
Blood deficiency
Aches during or after the period, mostly in the limbs,
1926
numbness/tingling of the limbs, tiredness, dizziness, Pale-Thin
tongue, Choppy pulse.
Blood stasis
Severe aches during or before the period, painful periods with
dark blood and clots, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
OEDEMA
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Oedema during or after the period especially of the ankles,
backache, tiredness, loose stools, heavy periods, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Qi stagnation
Non-pitting oedema during or before the periods, abdominal and
breast distension, premenstrual tension, irritability, Wiry pulse.
DIARRHOEA
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Diarrhoea during or after the period, slight abdominal distension,
poor appetite, tiredness, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Diarrhoea before the period, alternating constipation and
diarrhoea, premenstrual tension, breast distension, irritability,
Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Diarrhoea after the period, irregular periods, backache, dizziness,
1927
tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
CONSTIPATION
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Intestines
Constipation with bitty stools, abdominal distension,
premenstrual irritability, irregular periods, hypochondrial or
epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Constipation with dry stools, premenstrual weepiness and
depression, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, numbness/tingling
of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Constipation with infrequent bowel movements, lower backache,
cold knees, a sensation of cold in the lower back, a feeling of cold,
weak legs, bright-white complexion, weak knees, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at
night, oedema of the lower legs, depression, decreased libido, Pale
and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
NOSEBLEED
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Fire
Nosebleed before or during the period, heavy bleeding, abdominal
distension, bitter taste, thirst, irritability, headache, Red tongue
with redder sides and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
1928
Nosebleed during or after the period, dry cough, scanty period,
night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, five-palm heat, Red tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Nosebleed during the period, bleeding gums, burning epigastric
pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids, mental
restlessness, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, a feeling of
heat, tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating, Deep-Full-
Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Nosebleed during the period, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
MOUTH ULCERS
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Mouth or tongue ulcers during the period, dizziness, tinnitus,
night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
backache, poor memory, scanty-dark urine, five-palm heat, malar
flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Fire
Mouth ulcers during the period, bleeding gums, burning
epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold liquids,
mental restlessness, dry stools, sour regurgitation, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, tongue Red with a thick, dry dark-yellow coating,
Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
Stomach Damp-Heat with Spleen-Qi deficiency
Mouth ulcers, cold sores around the lips, abdominal distension,
loose stools, thirst with no desire to drink, a sticky taste, poor
appetite, Pale tongue but with a sticky yellow coating in the centre,
1929
Weak and Slippery pulse.
SKIN ERUPTIONS
Blood deficiency
Itchy papular skin eruptions during or after the period, insomnia,
dizziness, scanty periods, Pale-Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Wind-Heat invading Blood
Itchy skin eruptions during or before the period, irritability, dry
mouth, Red tongue with red points, Rapid pulse.
DIZZINESS
Blood deficiency
Dizziness during or after the period, blurred vision, scanty
periods, Pale-Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
Severe dizziness during or before the period, tinnitus, scanty
periods, insomnia, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm with Spleen-Qi deficiency
Severe dizziness during or before the period, a feeling of heaviness
and muzziness of the head, excessive vaginal discharge, swelling of
the breasts before the period, Pale and Swollen tongue, Slippery
and slightly Weak pulse.
VOMITING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
1930
Vomiting before or during the period, belching, epigastric
distension and pain, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Vomiting of thin fluids or nausea during or after the periods, dull
epigastric pain, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Phlegm with Spleen-Qi deficiency
Vomiting during the periods, nausea, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, tiredness, loose stools, poor appetite, Pale and Swollen
tongue, Slippery and slightly Weak pulse.
INSOMNIA
Liver-Yang rising
Insomnia before the periods, anxiety, dizziness, headache, dry
throat, irregular periods.
Other symptoms and signs, including pulse and tongue, depend
on the condition underlying the Liver-Yang rising, which may be
Liver-Blood deficiency, Liver-Yin deficiency or Kidney-Yin
deficiency.
Liver- and Heart-Fire
Insomnia during the period, dream-disturbed sleep, agitation,
anxiety, bitter taste, thirst, palpitations, bloodshot eyes, propensity
to outbursts of anger, dizziness, headache, epistaxis, heavy
periods, red face, Red tongue with redder sides and yellow coating,
Wiry and Rapid pulse.
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
Insomnia during or after the period, slight anxiety, depression,
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, poor appetite, Pale-Thin
tongue, Choppy pulse.
1931
EYE PAIN
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull eye pain at period time, dull headache, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, numbness/tingling of limbs, dull-pale complexion,
Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency giving rise to internal Wind
Eye pain at period time, facial tic, giddiness, vertigo, headache,
sallow complexion, blurred vision, floaters, Pale-Thin tongue, Wiry
pulse.
Liver-Fire
Eye pain at period time, bloodshot eyes, premenstrual tension,
heavy periods, red face, thirst, bitter taste, headaches, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, constipation,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Stabbing eye pain at period time, painful periods with dark clotted
blood, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
1932
CHAPTER 86
 
PROBLEMS
DURING
PREGNANCY
CHAPTER CONTENTS
MORNING SICKNESS
VAGINAL BLEEDING
ABDOMINAL PAIN
OEDEMA
URINATION PROBLEMS
Painful urination
Retention of urine
Blood in the urine
CONSTIPATION
ANXIETY
DIZZINESS
COUGH
LOSS OF VOICE
FEELING OF SUFFOCATION
1933
CONVULSIONS (ECLAMPSIA)
PROBLEMS WITH THE FETUS
Threatened miscarriage
Fetus not growing
Breech presentation
Habitual miscarriage
MORNING SICKNESS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Stomach-Qi deficiency with Empty-Cold
Slight morning sickness, absence of vomiting or vomiting of dilute
fluids, tiredness, a feeling of cold, poor appetite, Pale tongue,
Weak pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Morning sickness, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
poor appetite, tongue without coating in the centre.
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Morning sickness, retching, belching, vomiting of food with sour
taste, epigastric distension, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Stomach-Heat
Severe morning sickness that may persist beyond the first 3
months, vomiting of food soon after eating, burning epigastric
pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, excessive hunger, foul breath, a
feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow coating, Overflowing-
Rapid pulse.
Accumulation of Phlegm
Morning sickness, profuse vomiting, occasional vomiting of clear
1934
fluids with mucus, a feeling of oppression of the chest and
epigastrium, dizziness, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
Heart-Qi deficiency
Slight morning sickness, palpitations, anxiety, depression, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse on the left Front position.
Heart-Fire
Morning sickness which may persist beyond the first 3 months,
palpitations, thirst, agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a
feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip
and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Simple, straightforward cases of morning sickness
react well to P-6 Neiguan, Ren-13 Shangwan and ST-36
Zusanli. If they do not react to this treatment, it often
indicates that there is a pre-existing, underlying
Stomach pathology.
VAGINAL BLEEDING
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Vaginal bleeding early in the pregnancy, scanty fresh-red blood,
poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale
complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Vaginal bleeding early in the pregnancy, scanty pale blood, dull-
pale complexion, blurred vision, palpitation, insomnia, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Vaginal bleeding during the first 3 months, scanty fresh-red blood,
1935
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-
white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Blood-Heat
Vaginal bleeding which may occur beyond the first 3 months,
bright-red or dark-red blood, red face, anxiety, insomnia, dark
urine, Red tongue with yellow coating, Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy, scanty blood, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small
sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat,
malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Trauma
Vaginal bleeding after a fall or trauma, backache.
ABDOMINAL PAIN
Liver-Blood deficiency
Mild abdominal pain that comes and goes, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, blurred vision, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Abdominal pain and distension, hypochondrial pain and
distension, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Empty-Cold in the Uterus
Dull abdominal pain that improves with the application of heat
and drinking warm liquids, a feeling of cold, white complexion,
cold limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1936
OEDEMA
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
In some cases, oedema during pregnancy may be the first
symptom heralding a pre-eclampsia state.
Spleen-Yang deficiency
Oedema early in the pregnancy, swelling of face or whole body,
yellowish and shiny skin, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, bright-white complexion, loose stools,
feeling cold, cold limbs, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Oedema early in the pregnancy, worse in the ankles, cold legs,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus, feeling cold, weak knees, bright-
white complexion, tiredness, abundant-clear urination, Pale and
wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Qi stagnation
Oedema beginning towards the fourth month of pregnancy,
starting in the feet, not pitting, abdominal distension, irritability,
Wiry pulse.
URINATION PROBLEMS
Painful Urination
Heart-Fire
Burning on urination, scanty-dark urine, palpitations, thirst,
agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, feeling of heat, red
face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Burning on urination, difficult urination, slight retention, turbid
urine, thirst with no desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky
1937
taste, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Slight burning on urination, scanty dark urine, dizziness, tinnitus,
night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat, malar
flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slight pain after urination, pale urine, slight incontinence of urine,
pale face, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Retention Of Urine
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
Scanty but frequent urination, a feeling of bearing down, loose
stools, pale complexion, tiredness, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Kidney-Qi deficient and sinking
Scanty but frequent urination, pale urine, interrupted flow of
micturition, an uncomfortable sensation in the hypogastrium
which is worse when sitting, a feeling of cold, backache, dizziness,
Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Bladder
Difficult urination, dark/turbid urine, a feeling of heaviness in the
lower abdomen, sticky taste, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Urinary difficulty in the seventh or eighth month, hypochondrial
or epigastric distension, irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Blood In The Urine
1938
Heart-Fire
Blood in the urine during pregnancy, dark urine, palpitations,
thirst, a feeling of agitation, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, a
feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip
and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Blood in the urine during pregnancy, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache,
poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a
feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Blood in the urine in pregnancy, blurred vision, dry eyes, dizziness,
night sweating, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse
that is slightly Wiry on the left.
CONSTIPATION
Liver-Blood deficiency
Constipation, difficult defecation, dry stools, pale complexion,
dizziness, blurred vision, tiredness, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Constipation, difficulty in defecation, stools not dry, exhaustion
after defecation, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold,
weak knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Constipation, dry stools, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory,
scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
1939
Liver-Qi stagnation
Constipation, bitty stools, desire to open the bowels but difficulty
in doing so, belching, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
ANXIETY
Liver-Fire
Severe anxiety, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, red face, thirst, bitter taste,
constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry
yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Anxiety, worse in the evening, dry mouth with a desire to drink in
small sips, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat, backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Mind
Anxiety, mental restlessness, agitation, mental confusion, phobias,
irritability, a feeling of oppression of the chest, dizziness, nausea,
Red and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Heart-Fire
Severe anxiety, palpitations, thirst, agitation, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of heat, red face, bitter taste, Red tongue
with redder tip and yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Anxiety, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
1940
DIZZINESS
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
Severe dizziness towards the latter stages of pregnancy, tinnitus,
insomnia, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating, Red
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen deficiency with Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm
Dizziness with early onset during the pregnancy, swelling of the
fingers and ankles, tiredness, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
blurred vision, tingling of the limbs, insomnia, Pale tongue,
Choppy pulse if Liver-Blood deficiency predominates, or Slippery
and slightly Weak if Phlegm predominates.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Slight dizziness in pregnancy, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
COUGH
Lung-Yin deficiency
Dry cough that starts during the second trimester and is worse in
the evenings, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with a desire to
drink in small sips, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Cough with expectoration of profuse yellow sputum, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, mental restlessness, Red
and Swollen tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Cough with expectoration of profuse white sputum, a feeling of
1941
oppression of the chest, cold limbs, a feeling of heaviness, a sticky
taste, Swollen tongue with sticky white coating, Slippery pulse.
LOSS OF VOICE
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Loss of voice or hoarseness of voice towards the end of pregnancy,
dry throat, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a
desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark
urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Loss of voice or hoarseness of voice, dry cough with occasional
expectoration of scanty phlegm, a feeling of 
oppression of the
chest, sticky taste, mental restlessness, Swollen tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung-Yin deficiency
Loss of voice or hoarseness of the voice, preceded by a weakening
of the voice, dry cough, weak voice, dry throat with a desire to
drink in small sips, hoarse voice, night sweating, tiredness, tongue
without coating in the front, Floating-Empty pulse.
FEELING OF SUFFOCATION
Qi stagnation with disharmony of the Liver and Spleen
A feeling of suffocation and anxiety, a feeling of tightness of the
chest, irritability, insomnia, inability to lie down, a feeling of
energy rising from the lower abdomen towards the chest and
throat, a feeling of breathlessness, Pale tongue with slightly red
sides, pulse that is Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Qi stagnation with deficiency of Blood and Kidneys
Feeling of suffocation and anxiety, a feeling of tightness of the
chest, mental restlessness, insomnia, inability to lie down,
1942
tiredness, blurred vision, dizziness, backache, frequent urination,
Pale tongue, pulse that is Weak in general, especially on both the
Rear positions, and slightly Wiry on the left.
CONVULSIONS (ECLAMPSIA)
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver-Wind agitating within
Tremor of limbs, hypertension late in the pregnancy, headache,
malar flush, a feeling of heat in the afternoon, convulsions,
unconsciousness.
The pulse and tongue depend on the condition underlying the
Liver-Wind.
Phlegm-Fire harassing upwards
Slight tremor of limbs, hypertension, oedema, mental confusion,
unconsciousness, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen
tongue with a sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Empty-Wind
Slight tremor and twitching of limbs especially if occurring after
delivery, dizziness, palpitations, sweating, pale face, Pale and Short
tongue, Fine-Scattered pulse.
Blood deficiency
Mild convulsions of the legs that are worse in the evening,
insomnia, palpitations, blurred vision, dizziness, Pale and Thin
tongue, Choppy pulse.
PROBLEMS WITH THE FETUS
Threatened Miscarriage
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Kidney deficiency
1943
Threatened miscarriage early in the pregnancy, backache, scanty
vaginal bleeding, dizziness, exhaustion.
Other symptoms, including pulse and tongue, depend on
whether there is a Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Threatened miscarriage towards the end of pregnancy or beyond
the first 3 months, backache, scanty vaginal bleeding, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred
vision, dull-pale complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Blood-Heat
Threatened miscarriage early in the pregnancy, backache, scanty
vaginal bleeding, a feeling of heat, thirst, anxiety, insomnia, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Threatened miscarriage in the first 3 months, backache, scanty
vaginal bleeding, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Falls, trauma
Threatened miscarriage following a fall or a trauma, backache,
abdominal pain, scanty vaginal bleeding, tongue and pulse
normal.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: threatened miscarriage can be due to
causes within the mother or causes within the fetus. If
within the fetus, Chinese medicine is unlikely to help; if
within the mother, it can help.
Fetus Not Growing
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
1944
Slow fetal growth, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slow fetal growth in the fifth and sixth months, tiredness, loose
stools, poor appetite, backache, dizziness, Pale and Swollen
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Breech Presentation
Liver-Qi stagnation
Breech presentation, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Breech presentation, obesity, a feeling of heaviness of the body,
tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale and Swollen tongue,
Soft pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Breech presentation, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Habitual Miscarriage
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Kidney-Yang deficiency
A history of miscarriage early in the pregnancy, backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white
complexion, tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
A history of repeated miscarriage (usually in the first 3 months)
1945
and infertility, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with
a desire to drink in small sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark
urine, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Blood-Heat
A history of repeated miscarriages, often beyond the first 3
months, thirst, a feeling of heat, mental restlessness, a history of
heavy periods, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing and
Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
A history of repeated miscarriages after the first 3 months, poor
appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale complexion,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood deficiency
A history of repeated miscarriages, dizziness, blurred vision, a
history of scanty periods, insomnia, depression, dry hair and skin,
Pale and Thin tongue, Choppy pulse.
Blood stasis
A history of repeated miscarriages, abdominal pain, a history of
painful periods, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
1946
CHAPTER 87
 
PROBLEMS
AFTER
CHILDBIRTH
CHAPTER CONTENTS
RETENTION OF PLACENTA
LOCHIA
Persistent lochial discharge
Retention of lochia
PAIN
Abdominal pain
Joint pain
Hypochondrial pain
VAGINAL BLEEDING
Vaginal bleeding after childbirth
Amenorrhoea after miscarriage
URINARY DIFFICULTY
CONSTIPATION
1947
SWEATING
DIZZINESS
OEDEMA
FEVER
BREAST MILK
Breast milk not flowing
Spontaneous flow of milk after childbirth
POSTNATAL DEPRESSION/PSYCHOSIS
COLLAPSE
CONVULSIONS
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember to pay attention to invigorating Blood
after childbirth. The closer to the childbirth, the more
one needs to invigorate Blood. As a rule of thumb,
within 3 weeks from childbirth place the emphasis on
invigorating Blood (and nourishing Blood secondarily);
after 3 weeks place the emphasis on nourishing Blood
(and invigorating Blood secondarily).
RETENTION OF PLACENTA
Kidney-Qi deficiency
Retention of placenta, abdominal distension, abdominal pain that
is better with pressure, abundant lochia, pale complexion,
tiredness, breathlessness, backache, Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Retention of placenta, abdominal pain, retention of lochia, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
1948
Cold in the Uterus
Retention of placenta, abdominal pain that is alleviated by
application of heat, a feeling of cold, scanty lochia, pale
complexion, Pale tongue, Tight pulse.
LOCHIA
Persistent Lochial Discharge
Observation,
 
Chapter 20
Kidney-Qi deficiency
Persistent lochial discharge that is red, profuse, dilute and without
odour, dizziness, exhaustion, breathlessness, backache, sweating,
Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Persistent lochial discharge that is dark, scanty and with clots,
abdominal pain that is alleviated by passing clots, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Blood-Heat
Persistent lochial discharge that is dark in colour, red face, thirst, a
feeling of heat, anxiety, abdominal pain, dry stools, Red tongue
with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Persistent lochial discharge that is dilute and scarlet red, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small
sips, backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat,
malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Retention Of Lochia
Observation,
 
Chapter 20
1949
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
Absence of lochial discharge, or scanty discharge with clots, or
discharge that stops and starts, abdominal pain, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
Stagnation of Cold and stasis of Blood
Absent or scanty dark lochial discharge with small stringy clots,
abdominal pain relieved by the application of heat, cold limbs,
Bluish-Purple tongue, Tight pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Retention of lochia, no abdominal pain, poor appetite, loose stools,
weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale
complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
PAIN
Abdominal Pain
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull abdominal pain after childbirth that is relieved by pressure
and after eating, scanty but continuous uterine bleeding with pale
blood, dizziness, tiredness, blurred vision, constipation, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe abdominal pain after childbirth that is worse with pressure
and after eating, discharge of dark lochia, dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Retention of food
Abdominal and epigastric pain after childbirth, a feeling of
fullness of the abdomen and epigastrium, foul breath, belching,
thick tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
1950
Severe abdominal pain that is alleviated by the application and by
drinking warm liquids, cold limbs, dark lochia, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Tight pulse.
Joint Pain
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dull ache in the joints after childbirth, tingling of the limbs,
dizziness, blurred vision, insomnia, depression, tiredness, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Invasion of Wind
Pain in the joints after childbirth with sudden onset, contraction of
the joints, fever, shivers, Floating pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Severe joint pain after childbirth, stiffness of the joints,
contraction of the limbs, abdominal pain, scanty lochial discharge,
dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Dull joint pain after childbirth especially in the knees and lower
back, tiredness, dizziness, backache, frequent urination, a feeling
of cold, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak and Choppy pulse.
Hypochondrial Pain
Liver-Blood deficiency
Bilateral dull hypochondrial pain aggravated by exertion and
alleviated by rest, palpitations, blurred vision, dizziness, tiredness,
Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Right-sided hypochondrial pain and distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
1951
Left-sided, stabbing hypochondrial pain, retention of lochia,
hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, dark complexion, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
VAGINAL BLEEDING
Vaginal Bleeding After Childbirth
Kidney-Qi deficiency
Profuse bleeding after childbirth, dilute pale blood, sweating,
tiredness, exhaustion, pale complexion, palpitations, backache,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Bleeding after childbirth, dark blood with clots, abdominal pain,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Amenorrhoea After Miscarriage
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Amenorrhoea after miscarriage, abdomen soft to touch, absence of
abdominal distension or pain, absence of vaginal discharge, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred
vision, dull-pale complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Amenorrhoea after miscarriage, abdominal pain, dark complexion,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Amenorrhoea after miscarriage, abdominal distension,
hypochondrial or epigastric distension, breast distension,
depression, irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
1952
URINARY DIFFICULTY
This may include pain on urination, difficult urination, frequent
urination or slight retention of urine.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Frequency/incontinence of urine, or retention of urine after
childbirth, a feeling of fullness and distension in the
hypogastrium, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty
pulse.
Kidney-Qi deficiency
Frequency/incontinence of urine, or retention of urine after
childbirth, backache, dizziness, a feeling of cold, pale complexion,
Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Difficult urination after childbirth, a feeling of distension in the
lower abdomen, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Bladder-Heat
Frequency of urination after childbirth, blood in the urine, burning
on urination, anxiety, a feeling of heat, dry lips, dry mouth with a
desire to drink in small sips, night sweating, Red tongue without
coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Urinary retention after childbirth, absence of abdominal
distension or pain, dizziness, breathlessness, sweating, dislike of
speaking, depression, tiredness, poor appetite, pale complexion,
Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Injury to the Bladder
Incontinence of urine after childbirth, blood in the urine, Wiry
pulse on the left Rear position.
1953
CONSTIPATION
Liver-Blood deficiency
Constipation after childbirth, difficult defecation with dry stools,
dull-pale complexion, dizziness, blurred vision, tiredness,
depression, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Constipation after childbirth, difficulty in defecation, exhaustion
and sweating after defecation, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a
feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness,
abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Constipation after childbirth with dry stools, dizziness, tinnitus,
night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips,
backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Constipation after childbirth, difficult defecation, abdominal pain
relieved by the application of heat, scanty lochia, Bluish-Purple
tongue, Tight pulse.
SWEATING
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Kidney-Qi deficiency
Daytime sweating after childbirth, pale complexion,
breathlessness, weak voice, tiredness, backache, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Night-time sweating after childbirth, insomnia, dry throat, dry
mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, dizziness, tinnitus,
1954
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
DIZZINESS
Liver-Blood deficiency
Dizziness after childbirth, scanty lochia, blurred vision, tingling,
dull-pale complexion, palpitations, insomnia, depression, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Blood stasis
Dizziness after childbirth, dark lochia, abdominal pain, mental
restlessness, palpitations, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Kidney deficiency
Dizziness after childbirth, backache, tinnitus, tiredness.
Other symptoms and signs, including tongue and pulse, depend
on whether there is a Kidney-Yin or a Kidney-Yang deficiency.
OEDEMA
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Oedema after childbirth, more on the face or abdomen, poor
appetite, loose stools, weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred
vision, dull-pale complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
Oedema after childbirth, abdominal pain, joint pain, Purple
tongue, Wiry pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Oedema of the limbs after childbirth, poor appetite, tiredness,
slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale
tongue, Empty pulse.
1955
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Oedema of the ankles after childbirth, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
Damp-Heat
Oedema of the limbs after childbirth, swelling and heat of the
joints, feeling of heaviness, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
sticky taste, dark urine, difficult urination, sticky yellow tongue
coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
FEVER
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Invasion of external toxins
High fever after childbirth, lower abdominal pain that is worse
with pressure, scanty lochial discharge that is dark and offensive,
mental restlessness, thirst, delirium, convulsions, scanty dark
urine, constipation, Red tongue with a thick, sticky yellow coating
and red points, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Fever after childbirth, aversion to cold, fever, occipital headache,
stiff neck, sneezing, body aches, tongue with thin white coating,
Floating-Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Fever after childbirth, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat,
headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red sides
front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Low-grade fever after childbirth, sweating, exhaustion, pallor, poor
appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
1956
Liver-Blood deficiency
Continuous low-grade fever after childbirth, sweating, blurred
vision, palpitations, dizziness, tiredness, insomnia, tingling of the
limbs, Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Fever after childbirth, a feeling of heat, scanty lochial discharge,
abdominal pain, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Steaming breast
Low-grade fever 2 or 3 days after childbirth, breast milk which
does not flow freely or no milk at all, irritability, distension,
hardness and pain of the breasts, which feel lumpy, sticky yellow
tongue coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Retention of food
Low-grade fever 3 or 4 days after childbirth, fever that is higher in
the afternoon, bad digestion, a feeling of fullness and distension of
the epigastrium, sour regurgitation, belching, foul breath, thick
sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
BREAST MILK
Breast Milk Not Flowing
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Insufficient or absent breast milk, watery milk, absence of feeling
of distension of the breasts, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Absent or scanty breast milk, a feeling of distension, hardness and
pain of the breasts, hypochondrial distension, sighing, irritability,
1957
tongue Red on the sides, Wiry pulse.
Spontaneous Flow Of Milk After Childbirth
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Spontaneous flow of milk a few days after childbirth, scanty but
constant flow of watery milk, soft breasts, absence of feeling of
distension of the breasts, dull epigastric pain, poor appetite,
tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose
stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Liver-Fire
Spontaneous trickling of milk after childbirth, dense milk, a
feeling of distension of the breasts, hypochondrial distension,
headaches, dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts
of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red
tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
POSTNATAL
DEPRESSION/PSYCHOSIS
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency
Postnatal depression, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, poor
memory, anxiety, dull-pale complexion, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Heart-Yin deficiency
Postnatal depression, poor memory, anxiety, mental restlessness,
scanty breast milk, loss of libido, palpitations, dizziness, insomnia,
night sweating, dry throat, numbness/tingling of the limbs,
1958
blurred vision, floaters, dry eyes, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion, withered and brittle nails, dry
skin and nails, tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Heart-Blood stasis
Postnatal psychosis, manic behaviour, aggressive behaviour,
delusions, hallucinations, suicidal, palpitations, chest pain, purple
lips, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Choppy pulse.
COLLAPSE
Collapse of Qi with deficiency of Blood
Profuse bleeding after childbirth, sudden vertigo, pale complexion,
palpitations, fainting, cold limbs, profuse sweating, Pale and Short
tongue, Fine or Scattered pulse.
Blood stasis
Retention of lochia or scanty lochia, abdominal pain, a feeling of
fullness under the heart, chest pain, cough, 
fainting, mouth closed,
dark complexion, Purple-Stiff tongue, Wiry pulse.
CONVULSIONS
Blood and Yin deficiency with Empty-Wind
Profuse loss of blood during childbirth, tremor of limbs, rigidity of
the spine, pale complexion or malar flush, tongue without coating,
pulse Choppy or Floating-Empty.
Exterior invasion of toxin
Shivers and fever soon after childbirth, headache, stiff neck,
rigidity of the spine, lock jaw, convulsions, in severe cases
opisthotonos, Red-Stiff tongue with yellow coating and red points,
Wiry pulse.
1959
CHAPTER 88
 
BREAST SIGNS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
BREAST DISTENSION AND SWELLING
Breast distension
Swollen breasts
Redness and swelling of the breasts
BREAST PAIN
BREAST LUMPS
NIPPLES
Milky nipple discharge
Sticky yellow nipple discharge
Bloody discharge from the nipple
Cracked nipples
Inverted nipples
PEAU D’ORANGE SKIN
SMALL BREASTS
1960
BREAST DISTENSION AND
SWELLING
Breast Distension
Observation,
 
Chapter 12
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Liver-Qi stagnation
Breast distension which may be unilateral or bilateral, more
obvious on the lateral side, decreasing after the period, breasts
relatively hard, premenstrual tension, hypochondrial distension,
moodiness, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm and Qi stagnation
Swelling and distension of the breasts that is relatively soft,
obesity, a feeling of oppression of the chest, expectoration of
sputum, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Deficiency of Qi and Blood
Slight distension of the breasts, no pain, poor appetite, loose
stools, weak voice, palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale
complexion, dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight breast distension which occasionally may even occur 
after
the period, tiredness, lethargy, a feeling of cold, lower backache,
cold limbs, weak limbs, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Lung-Qi stagnation
A feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling
of oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
sighing, sadness, irritability, depression, tongue slightly Red on
the sides in the chest areas, pulse very slightly Tight on the right
Front position.
Phlegm with Lung-Qi stagnation
1961
Phlegm in the throat, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
difficulty in swallowing, sighing, sadness, irritability, depression,
sputum in the throat, tongue slightly Swollen on the sides in the
chest areas, Slippery pulse that is also very slightly Tight on the
right Front position.
Swollen Breasts
Observation,
 
Chapter 12
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm
Severe breast distension and swelling, breast pain, premenstrual
tension, irritability, hypochondrial distension, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, Swollen tongue with
sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm-Heat
Severe breast distension and swelling, breast pain, premenstrual
tension, irritability, hypochondrial distension, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, a feeling of heat,
thirst with no desire to drink, red face, Swollen tongue with sticky
yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Slight breast distension and swelling, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, sputum in the throat, obesity, tiredness, a feeling of cold,
lower backache, cold limbs, lethargy, loose stools, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
Redness And Swelling Of The Breasts
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat with Blood stasis
Breasts red, hard, painful and swollen, irregular periods, heavy
periods, irritability, tongue with Reddish-Purple sides, Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
1962
Toxic Heat
Red, swollen, painful breasts, thirst, a feeling of heat, mental
restlessness, Red tongue with red points and sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat
Red, swollen and distended breasts, hypochondrial distension,
irritability, premenstrual tension, heavy periods, tongue with Red
sides, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
BREAST PAIN
Severe Liver-Qi stagnation
Breast pain and distension that is worse premenstrually, irregular
periods, premenstrual tension, hypochondrial distension,
moodiness, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm
Breast pain and distension, swollen breasts, a feeling of a lump in
the throat, phlegm in the throat, premenstrual tension,
hypochondrial distension, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
irritability, irregular periods, Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver-Blood stasis
Stabbing breast pain, chest pain, period pain, dark menstrual
blood with dark clots, irregular periods, hypochondrial pain,
abdominal pain, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Toxic Heat
Redness, pain and swelling of the breast, a feeling of heat, fever,
thirst, Red tongue with red points and dry, sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
BREAST LUMPS
1963
Observation,
 
Chapter 12
 
; 
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Palpation,
Chapter 51
Liver-Qi stagnation
Lumpy breasts, small nodules that are not hard and decrease in
size after the period, severe premenstrual breast distension,
premenstrual tension, pain in the breasts, depression, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Blood stasis
Hard breast lumps which are immovable and may be painful, chest
pain, irregular periods, painful periods, premenstrual tension,
Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Phlegm and Qi stagnation
Soft, painless, breast lumps, movable and slipping under the
finger on palpation, premenstrual breast distension and swelling,
premenstrual tension, a feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
oppression and distension of the chest, irritability, depression,
Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
Lumpy breasts, soft nodules, a feeling of heaviness, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, tiredness, a feeling of cold, poor appetite,
loose stools, dizziness, tinnitus, backache, profuse pale urination,
urination at night, irregular periods, Pale, Swollen and wet tongue
with sticky coating, Deep-Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
Disharmony of Directing and Penetrating Vessels
Lumpy breasts, small hard nodules, swollen breasts, premenstrual
breast distension, late cycle, infertility, irregular periods, anxiety,
abdominal pain, backache, cold feet, Pale tongue, Fine-Wiry pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Fire
Single large and hard breast lump, painful breasts, thirst, bitter
taste, headaches, irritability, red face, dark urine, dry stools, Red
1964
tongue with redder sides, Wiry- Rapid pulse.
Phlegm with Lung-Qi stagnation
Soft and movable breast lumps, phlegm in the throat, a feeling of a
lump in the throat, a feeling of oppression and distension of the
chest, slight breathlessness, sighing, sadness, worry, irritability,
depression, tongue slightly swollen on the sides in the chest areas,
pulse that is Slippery and very slightly Tight on the right Front
position.
Toxic Heat
Large breast lump with discharge of yellow fluid, pain in the
breast, thirst, bitter taste, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides
and thick, sticky, dry yellow coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Chronic breast lumps, loss of weight, dark complexion, tiredness,
irregular periods, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry eyes,
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
NIPPLES
Milky Nipple Discharge
Severe deficiency of Qi and Blood
Slight milky nipple discharge that is aggravated by exertion and
ameliorated by rest, poor appetite, loose stools, weak voice,
palpitations, tiredness, blurred vision, dull-pale complexion,
dizziness, Pale tongue, Weak or Choppy pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Slight milky nipple discharge that is aggravated by exertion and
ameliorated by rest, heavy or scanty periods, premenstrual
oedema, tiredness, lower backache, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
loose stools, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
1965
Liver-Qi stagnation
Premenstrual milky nipple discharge, breast distension,
premenstrual tension, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Sticky Yellow Nipple Discharge
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Sticky yellow nipple discharge, breast distension and pain,
irregular periods, painful periods, mid-cycle pain, yellow vaginal
discharge, urinary discomfort, tongue with sticky yellow coating,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat
Sticky yellow nipple discharge, redness, swelling and pain of the
breasts, feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness, Red tongue
with red points on the sides and sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Bloody Discharge From The Nipple
Toxic Heat
Bloody discharge from the nipple, redness, swelling and pain of
the breasts, a feeling of heat, thirst, mental restlessness, Red
tongue with red points on the sides and sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat
Intermittent bloody discharge from the nipple, premenstrual
breast distension, premenstrual tension, irritability, irregular
periods, a feeling of heat, red face, tongue with Red sides, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Deficiency of the Liver and Kidneys and of the
Penetrating Vessel
Intermittent bloody discharge from the nipple that is aggravated
by exertion and ameliorated by rest, heavy or scanty periods,
1966
tiredness, dizziness, tinnitus, backache, Deep-Weak pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether there is a Yin or
a Yang deficiency.
Cracked Nipples
Observation,
 
Chapter 12
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Fire
Cracked nipples, flaking skin over the nipples, stabbing pain in
the nipple, irritability, thirst, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder
sides and yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat
Cracked nipple with dry skin, slight pain, bleeding from the
nipple, crusts on the nipple, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, mental restlessness, thirst with a desire to drink in small
sips, dry mouth, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Inverted Nipples
Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-Blood stasis with Phlegm
Inverted nipples, distended and painful breasts, premenstrual
tension, irregular periods, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
hypochondrial distension and pain, painful periods, tongue
Swollen and with Purple sides, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis
Inverted nipples, redness, pain and swelling of the breasts,
hypochondrial pain, feeling of heat, mental restlessness, thirst,
irregular periods, painful periods, Red tongue with Reddish-
Purple sides, red points and a sticky yellow coating, Overflowing-
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
PEAU D’ ORANGE SKIN
1967
‘Peau d’orange’ means orange skin and it refers to an area of the
breast with many small dimples resembling an orange skin.
Liver-Qi stagnation and Liver-Blood stasis with Phlegm
Peau d’orange, distended and painful breasts, premenstrual
tension, irregular periods, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
hypochondrial distension and pain, painful periods, tongue
Swollen and with Purple sides, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis
Peau d’orange, redness, pain and swelling of the breasts,
hypochondrial pain, a feeling of heat, mental restlessness, thirst,
irregular periods, painful periods, Red tongue with Reddish-
Purple sides and red points and a sticky yellow coating,
Overflowing-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
SMALL BREASTS
Observation,
 
Chapter 12
Qi and Blood deficiency
Gradual decrease in breast size, poor appetite, loose stools, weak
voice, tiredness, blurred vision, dizzi-ness, numbness/tingling of
the limbs, palpitations, dull-pale complexion, Pale tongue, Weak or
Choppy pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Gradual decrease in breast size, dry vagina, scanty menstruation or
amenorrhoea, delayed cycle, infertility, dizziness, tinnitus,
hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, dry throat, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, night
sweating, dry stools, normal-coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Stomach-Qi deficiency
1968
Sagging breasts, an uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, no
appetite, lack of sense of taste, loose stools, tiredness especially in
the morning, weak limbs, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Blood deficient and dry
Gradual decrease in breast size, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of limbs, scanty menstruation, dull-pale
complexion, dry eyes, dry skin and hair, dry nails, Pale tongue,
Choppy or Fine pulse.
1969
CHAPTER 89
 
MISCELLANEOUS
GYNAECOLOGICAL
SYMPTOMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INFERTILITY
MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME
ABDOMINAL MASSES
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
White
Yellow
Red-white
Five-colour
INFLAMMATION AND SWELLING
Vaginal itching
Genital eczema
Vulvar sores
Swelling of the vulva
1970
PROLAPSE
Prolapse of uterus
Prolapse of vagina
LEUKOPLAKIA
DYSPAREUNIA
BLEEDING ON INTERCOURSE
LACK OF LIBIDO
PUBIC HAIR
Loss of pubic hair
Excessive pubic hair
INFERTILITY
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Kidney deficiency
Primary or secondary infertility, late periods, scanty periods,
backache, dizziness, tinnitus.
Other symptoms, including tongue and pulse, depend on
whether there is Kidney-Yang or Kidney-Yin deficiency. This is the
most common cause of infertility, accounting for over half the
cases.1
Blood deficiency
Secondary infertility, scanty periods or amenorrhoea, late periods,
tiredness, dizziness, blurred vision, pale complexion, Pale-Thin
tongue, Choppy pulse.
Cold in the Uterus
Primary infertility, late periods, painful periods, bright-red blood
with small, dark clots, a feeling of cold during the period, cold
limbs, backache, Pale tongue, Tight pulse.
1971
Dampness in the Lower Burner
Secondary infertility, excessive vaginal discharge, late periods, mid-
cycle pain and bleeding, a feeling of heaviness, obesity, sticky
tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Blood-Heat
Secondary infertility, early periods, heavy periods, a feeling of heat,
thirst, anxiety, Red tongue, Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
Qi stagnation
Secondary infertility, irregular periods, premenstrual tension,
breast distension, irritability, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis
Secondary infertility, painful periods, dark blood with large, dark
clots, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Blood Empty-Heat
Secondary infertility, heavy periods, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache,
poor memory, scanty dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a
feeling of heat in the evening, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
More than half of the cases of infertility are due to a
Kidney deficiency.
• 
 
This means that nearly half of cases are due to a Full
condition and especially Damp-Phlegm in the Uterus.
MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
Kidney-Yin deficiency
1972
Hot flushes, dryness of the vagina, dizziness, tinnitus, night
sweating, dry mouth with a desire to drink in small sips, backache,
poor memory, scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Hot flushes, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak
knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Hot flushes, night sweating, dryness of the vagina, backache,
dizziness, tinnitus, cold feet, frequent urination. The tongue is Pale
if Kidney-Yang deficiency predominates and Red if Kidney-Yin
deficiency predominates.
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
Hot flushes, dryness of the vagina, dry eyes, blurred vision,
headache, irritability, insomnia, Red tongue without coating, pulse
Floating-Empty and slightly Wiry on the left.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Hot flushes, dryness of the vagina, night sweating, palpitations,
insomnia, dizziness, tinnitus, anxiety, mental restlessness,
depression, a feeling of heat in the evening, dry mouth and throat,
poor memory, tongue without coating, pulse Floating-Empty.
Accumulation of Phlegm and stagnation of Qi
Hot flushes, obesity, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
expectoration of scanty phlegm, a feeling of distension of the
breasts, irritability, sighing, nausea, depression, tongue slightly
Red on the sides, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
This pattern frequently appears in early menopause.
Blood stasis
Hot flushes, night sweating, anxiety, mental restlessness, a feeling
1973
of agitation, menopause preceded by a period of time when
menses are very irregular, stopping for a long time and then
starting again, insomnia, possibly hypertension, Purple tongue,
Wiry pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: menopausal symptoms are not always
due to Kidney-Yin deficiency. A simultaneous deficiency
of both Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang (in varying
proportions) is the most common situation.
ABDOMINAL MASSES
Observation,
 
Chapter 16
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 71
Liver-Qi stagnation
Movable abdominal masses which come and go, abdominal
distension and pain, hypochondrial or epigastric distension,
depression, irritability, moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood
Hard and immovable abdominal masses, abdominal distension
and pain, late periods, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Blood stasis knotted in the Interior
Hard, immovable and painful abdominal masses, dark complexion,
dry skin, a feeling of cold, amenorrhoea, 
painful periods, late
periods, Purple tongue, Choppy pulse.
Damp-Phlegm
Relatively soft abdominal masses, sputum in the throat, excessive
vaginal discharge, ovarian cysts, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, Swollen tongue with sticky coating,
Slippery pulse.
1974
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 46
 
; 
Hearing and Smelling,
 
Chapter 54
White
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Profuse white vaginal discharge that is aggravated by exertion,
sticky without offensive odour, poor appetite, tiredness, slight
abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose stools, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Profuse and dilute, white vaginal discharge, without offensive
odour, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees,
bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale
and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Cold-Dampness
Profuse and sticky white vaginal discharge, a feeling of heaviness,
abdominal fullness, sticky taste, thick, sticky white tongue coating,
Slippery-Slow pulse.
Damp-Heat
White vaginal discharge that may look like curdled milk, offensive
odour, a feeling of heaviness, thirst with no desire to drink, vaginal
itching and redness, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid
pulse.
Yellow
Damp-Heat
Yellow, profuse vaginal discharge, sticky with strong odour, vaginal
redness and itching, a feeling of heaviness, abdominal fullness,
thirst with no desire to drink, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
1975
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic, pale-yellow vaginal discharge, abundant and dilute,
without strong odour, irregular periods, heavy periods, poor
appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale complexion,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Red-White
Damp-Heat
Red-white vaginal discharge, abundant and sticky, vaginal redness,
itching and swelling, abdominal pain, painful urination,
abdominal fullness, a feeling of heaviness, thirst with no desire to
drink, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Damp-Heat in the Liver
channel
Red-white vaginal discharge, predominantly red, abundant and
sticky with strong odour, vaginal itching, abdominal distension
and pain, irritability, dizziness, hypochondrial pain, unilateral
sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Red-white vaginal discharge, scanty and dilute, vaginal burning
and itching, difficult urination, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating,
five-palm heat, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and
Rapid pulse.
Five-Colour
The ‘five-colour vaginal discharge’ may be watery like rice soup,
like bloody water or like pus, usually with an offensive odour. The
five colours are white, yellow, red, green and dark brown (like soya
sauce).
Damp-Heat
Five-colour vaginal discharge, abundant and sticky, with an
offensive odour, a feeling of heaviness, abdominal fullness, thirst
1976
with no desire to drink, a sticky taste, sticky yellow tongue coating,
Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Five-colour vaginal discharge, scanty without odour, vaginal
itching and redness, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, five-palm
heat, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
Cold in the Lower Burner
Five-colour vaginal discharge that is watery and with an offensive
odour, a feeling of cold, abdominal pain, painful periods, Pale
tongue, Tight pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation with Damp-Heat in the Liver
channel
Five-colour vaginal discharge without odour, abdominal
distension, hypochondrial pain, bitter taste, thirst with no desire
to drink, irritability, tongue with unilateral sticky yellow coating,
Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Toxic Heat
Profuse yellow, blood-stained vaginal discharge, offensive odour, a
feeling of heat, thirst, dark urine, Red tongue with a sticky yellow
coating, Overflowing-Slippery-Rapid pulse.
INFLAMMATION AND SWELLING
Vaginal Itching
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Intense vaginal itching, yellow vaginal discharge, pain on
intercourse, irritability, insomnia, dark urine, Red tongue with
redder sides and sticky yellow coating, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
1977
Slight vaginal itching, white vaginal discharge, tiredness, poor
appetite, loose stools, a feeling of heaviness, Pale tongue with
sticky white coating, Weak and slightly Slippery pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Vaginal itching with a burning sensation, dryness of the vagina,
night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of heat in the evening,
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Genital Eczema
Observation,
 
Chapter 21
 
; 
Symptoms and Signs,
 
Chapter 77
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Genital eczema with papules that ooze a fluid, red and moist
genital area, vaginal itching, difficult urination, tongue with Red
sides and sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Blood deficient and dry
Genital eczema with thickening of the skin, dryness of the vagina,
dry red rash, vaginal itching, Pale and dry tongue, Choppy or Fine
pulse.
Vulvar Sores
Toxic Heat with Liver-Fire and Damp-Heat
Vulvar sores, redness, swelling, heat and pain of the external
genitalia, oozing of yellow fluid, Red tongue with redder sides with
thick, sticky yellow coating and red spots, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid
pulse.
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in the Liver channel
Vulvar sores, redness, swelling, heat and pain of the external
genitalia, dyspareunia, oozing of yellow fluid, Reddish-Purple
tongue with thick sticky yellow coating and red spots, Slippery-
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
1978
Retention of Cold
Vulvar erosion and pain, pale lesions in genital area, chronic
condition with repeated attacks, lassitude, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Swelling Of The Vulva
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis in the Liver channel
Swelling of the vulva, pain in the perineum, genital papular
eruptions, sticky yellow vaginal discharge, hypogastric pain, a
feeling of heat, mental restlessness, Reddish-Purple tongue with
thick, sticky yellow coating and red spots on the root and sides,
Slippery-Rapid-Firm pulse.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lower Burner
Swelling of the vulva, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen,
abdominal fullness, ovarian cysts, painful periods, excessive
vaginal discharge, Swollen tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
Damp-Heat and Toxic Heat in the Liver channel
Swelling of the vulva, pain in the perineum, genital papular
eruptions, sticky yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, vulvar
eczema or sores, genital papular skin rashes and itching, mid-cycle
bleeding/pain, fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or
hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a 
feeling of
heaviness of the body, urinary difficulty, burning on urination,
dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and red points and a
thick, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
PROLAPSE
Prolapse Of Uterus
Spleen-Qi sinking
Prolapse of the uterus, a feeling of bearing down in the lower
1979
abdomen, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
Kidney-Qi deficient and sinking
Prolapse of the uterus, frequent urination, bearing-down
sensation, backache, frequent urination, slight incontinence of
urine, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Prolapse Of Vagina
Spleen-Qi sinking
Prolapse of vagina, feeling of bearing down in the abdomen, poor
appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale complexion,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Kidney-Qi not firm
Prolapse of vagina, soreness and weakness of the lower back, weak
knees, frequent clear urination, weak-stream urination, abundant
urination, dribbling after urination, incontinence of urine,
urination at night, prolapse of uterus, chronic white vaginal
discharge, tiredness, a dragging-down feeling in the lower
abdomen, recurrent miscarriage, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
LEUKOPLAKIA
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Leukoplakia, vaginal itching and swelling, yellow vaginal
discharge, difficult urination, bitter taste, a feeling of heaviness,
irritability, tongue with Red sides and sticky yellow coating, Wiry-
Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Leukoplakia, thickening of the skin, ulcers, white vaginal
discharge, sticky white tongue coating, Weak and Slippery pulse.
1980
Liver-Blood deficiency
Leukoplakia, dryness and itching of the vagina that is worse at
night, dull complexion, blurred vision, dizziness, scanty periods,
Pale tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Leukoplakia, dryness of the vagina, backache, tinnitus, dizziness,
tongue without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Leukoplakia, vaginal itching, scanty periods, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak knees, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Weak pulse.
DYSPAREUNIA
Liver-Blood stasis
Dyspareunia, hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, painful
periods, dark complexion, Purple tongue, Wiry pulse.
Dampness in the Lower Burner
Dyspareunia, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen, excessive
vaginal discharge, painful periods, sticky tongue coating, Slippery
pulse.
Liver-Fire
Dyspareunia, heavy periods, headaches, dizziness, tinnitus,
irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter
taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue with redder sides and
dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
Dyspareunia, heavy periods, irregular periods, dizziness, blurred
vision, floaters, dry eyes, dry hair, dry nails, insomnia, tinnitus,
1981
night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to sip water, backache,
poor memory, scanty dark urine, tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
BLEEDING ON INTERCOURSE
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Bleeding on intercourse with fresh blood, backache, dizziness,
tinnitus, a feeling of heat in the evening, 
night sweating, tongue
without coating, Floating-Empty pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Directing and Penetrating Vessels
Bleeding on intercourse with sticky dark blood, yellow or white-red
vaginal discharge, backache, abdominal pain and fullness, sticky
yellow tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Bleeding on intercourse with pale dilute blood, poor appetite,
tiredness, slight abdominal distension, pale complexion, loose
stools, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
LACK OF LIBIDO
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 45
Heart-Qi deficiency
Lack of libido, palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, pale
complexion, tiredness, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat
Lack of libido, palpitations, mental restlessness, anxiety, dizziness,
tinnitus, night sweating, dry mouth with a desire to sip water,
backache, poor memory, scanty dark urine, tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
1982
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Lack of libido, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, weak
knees, bright-white complexion, tiredness, abundant clear
urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Liver-Blood deficiency
Lack of libido, dizziness, blurred vision, floaters,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, dull-pale complexion, Pale
tongue, Choppy or Fine pulse.
Liver-Qi stagnation
Lack of libido, hypochondrial or epigastric distension, irritability,
moodiness, Wiry pulse.
Dampness in the Lower Burner
Lack of libido, excessive vaginal discharge, a feeling of heaviness in
the abdomen, painful periods, tongue with sticky coating, Slippery
pulse.
PUBIC HAIR
Loss Of Pubic Hair
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Loss of pubic hair, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, poor
memory, loose teeth, premature greying of hair, infertility, sterility,
Leather pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Loss of pubic hair, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, bright-white complexion, loose stools, a feeling of cold,
cold limbs, backache, dizziness, tinnitus, weak knees, abundant
clear urination, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Excessive Pubic Hair
1983
Phlegm and Blood stasis
Excessive pubic hair, pain in the genital area, irregular and painful
periods, a feeling of oppression of the chest, Swollen and Purple
tongue, Slippery-Wiry pulse.
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Excessive pubic hair, dizziness, tinnitus, night sweating, dry
mouth with a desire to sip water, backache, poor memory, scanty
dark urine, five-palm heat, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the
evening, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty and Rapid
pulse.
NOTES
1. 
Gynaecology Department of the Long Hua Hospital
Affiliated to the Shanghai College of Traditional Chinese
Medicine. Report on the differentiation and treatment of
257 cases of infertility. 
Journal of Chinese Medicine (
 Zhong
Yi Za Zhi 
 
) . 1987; 28(10):38.
1984
SECTION 3
PAEDIATRIC
SYMPTOMS
AND SIGNS
1985
 
PAEDIATRIC
SYMPTOMS AND
SIGNS
 
Section contents
90. 
 
Children’s problems
INTRODUCTION
Section 3 of 
Part 5
 
deals with the symptoms and signs that are
typical of children. The symptoms and signs of children are often
quite distinct from those of adults, for example crying at night,
Accumulation Disorder, nocturnal enuresis, late closure of the
fontanelles and various childhood diseases. In order to ask the
right questions, we should therefore be familiar with the general
principles of Chinese paediatrics.
Particularly important symptoms and signs are those revolving
around digestion and the respiratory system as these are the two
areas of most common illness in children. Indeed, there is a link
between these two as many respiratory problems of children
(especially those linked to residual pathogenic factor) are often
due to Phlegm, which itself is generally formed when there is a
1986
disharmony in the digestive system.
1987
CHAPTER 90
 
CHILDREN’S
PROBLEMS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
FEVER
Low-grade fever
VOMITING
DIARRHOEA
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
Cough
Wheezing
EAR PROBLEMS
Earache
Glue ear
HOT PALMS AND SOLES
CONSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESS
CONSTIPATION IN INFANCY
URINATION PROBLEMS
Retention of urine in infancy
1988
Nocturnal enuresis
CRYING
Crying at night in babies
DISTURBED SLEEP
ACCUMULATION DISORDER
WORMS
Pinworms
Roundworms
FIVE FLACCIDITIES
FIVE RETARDATIONS
INFLAMMATION
Acute skin rash
Erysipelas
JAUNDICE
INFECTIONS
Chickenpox
Mumps
FLAPPING OF NOSTRILS
CONVULSIONS
Acute
Chronic
FETUS TOXIN
FONTANELLES
Sunken fontanelles
Raised fontanelles
Late closure of fontanelles
WHITE SPOTS ON THE PALATE AND TONGUE
LONG PENIS
1989
For problems such as learning dificulty and hyperactivity, see
Chapter 80
 
.
FEVER
External invasion of Wind-Cold
Low fever, aversion to cold, occipital headache, stiff neck,
sneezing, body aches, tongue with thin white coating, Floating-
Tight pulse.
External invasion of Wind-Heat
Fever, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, headache, body aches,
slight sweating, tongue with Red sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Heat in Bright Yang
High fever, a feeling of heat, throwing off of the bed clothes, thirst,
irritability, crying, sweating, Red tongue with yellow coating,
Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
This corresponds to the Bright-Yang channel pattern within the
identification of patterns according to the Six Stages, which is
equivalent to the Stomach-Heat pattern within the identification of
patterns according to the Four Levels.
Dry-Heat in the Intestines
High fever that is worse in the afternoon, a feeling of heat,
throwing off of the bed clothes, constipation, abdominal fullness
and pain, thirst, sweating, Red tongue with thick, dry yellow
coating, Deep-Full-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds to the Bright-Yang organ pattern within the
identification of patterns according to the Six Stages, which is
equivalent to the Intestines Dry-Heat pattern within the
identification of patterns according to the Four Levels.
Heat at the Ying level
High fever that is worse at night, delirium, fainting, dry mouth,
macules, Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
1990
This corresponds to the patterns of Heat in the Pericardium or
Heat in the Ying within the identification of patterns according to
the Four Levels.
Heat at the Blood level
High fever that is worse at night, delirium, fainting, dry mouth,
pronounced and numerous dark macules, epistaxis, blood in the
stools, blood in the urine, mental confusion, Reddish-Purple
tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
This corresponds to the Blood-Heat pattern at the Blood level
within the identification of patterns according to the Four Levels.
Low-Grade Fever
Retention of food
Recurrent low-grade fever, epigastric fullness, loose stools, sour
regurgitation, foul breath, abdominal pain, thick sticky tongue
coating, Slippery pulse.
Residual Heat in the Lungs
Low-grade fever, dry cough, a feeling of heat, irritability, tongue
Red in the front, Fine-Rapid pulse.
Damp-Heat
Low-grade fever that is worse in the afternoon, sweating, a feeling
of heaviness, thirst with no desire to drink, nausea, loose stools,
sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Qi deficiency
Low-grade fever, sweating, listlessness, shortness of breath, pale
complexion, poor appetite, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Yin deficiency
Low-grade fever in the afternoon, night sweating, dry throat,
mental restlessness, malar flush, Red tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse.
1991
VOMITING
Accumulation of breast milk from overfeeding in
infants
Vomiting of curdled milk with offensive odour, crying, better after
vomiting, epigastric fullness and distension, stools with offensive
odour.
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Vomiting, nausea, sticky taste, skin rashes, a feeling of fullness and
pain of the epigastrium and lower abdomen, poor appetite, a
feeling of heaviness, thirst without a desire to drink, loose stools
with offensive odour, a feeling of heat, dull-yellow complexion,
Red tongue with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Stomach-Qi deficiency
Vomiting of fluids, cold limbs, pale complexion, listlessness, Pale
tongue, Weak pulse.
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Vomiting of thin fluids, retching, dry lips, dry mouth with a desire
to drink in small sips, irritability, crying, tongue without coating in
the centre, Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Vomiting of thin fluids, dull-pale complexion, cold limbs,
listlessness, loose stools, Pale-Swollen tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Invasion of Cold in the Stomach
Sudden vomiting, epigastric pain, desire to drink warm liquids,
thick white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
DIARRHOEA
Spleen-Qi deficiency
1992
Chronic diarrhoea, poor appetite, tiredness, slight abdominal
distension, pale complexion, Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
Retention of food
Loose stools, epigastric fullness and pain, foul breath, sour
regurgitation, nausea, thick sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Invasion of Cold in the Spleen
Sudden diarrhoea, abdominal pain, a feeling of heat and cold,
thick white tongue coating, Tight pulse.
Invasion of Damp-Heat
Sudden diarrhoea with offensive odour, abdominal pain and
fullness, irritability, a feeling of heat, dark urine, sticky yellow
tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
Cough
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 47
Invasion of Wind-Cold
Cough with expectoration of white sputum, aversion to cold, fever,
occipital headache, stiff neck, sneezing, body aches, tongue with
thin white coating, Floating- Tight pulse.
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Cough with expectoration of yellow sputum, aversion to cold,
fever, sore throat, headache, body aches, slight sweating, tongue
with Red sides/front, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Barking cough with expectoration of profuse sticky yellow or green
sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of oppression of
the chest, a feeling of heat, thirst, Red and Swollen tongue with a
1993
sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
Slight cough with low sound, expectoration of thin sputum,
shortness of breath, pale complexion, poor appetite, loose stools,
Pale tongue, Weak pulse.
Wheezing
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 47
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Acute wheezing, cough with expectoration of white sputum, pale
face, shortness of breath, a feeling of tightness of the chest, sticky
white coating, Slippery-Slow pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Acute wheezing, cough with expectoration of yellow sputum, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, slightly red face, shortness of
breath, sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Residual Phlegm in the Lungs with Lung-Qi deficiency
Chronic wheezing, cough with occasional expectoration of scanty
sputum, insomnia, a feeling of oppression of the chest, tiredness,
pale face, shortness of breath, Pale tongue with swelling in the
Lung area, Empty pulse.
Residual Phlegm in the Lungs with Spleen-Qi
deficiency
Chronic wheezing, cough with occasional expectoration of scanty
sputum, insomnia, a feeling of oppression of the chest, tiredness,
pale face, shortness of breath, poor appetite, loose stools, a desire
to lie down, Pale tongue with swelling in the Lung area, Empty
pulse.
Deficiency of the Defensive-Qi system of the Lungs
and Kidneys
1994
Chronic wheezing, allergic asthma, history of eczema, hay fever,
Pale tongue, Empty pulse.
EAR PROBLEMS
Earache
Interrogation,
 
Chapter 47
Invasion of Wind-Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels
Acute earache, aversion to cold, fever, sore throat, headache, body
aches, slight sweating, tongue with Red sides/front, Floating-Rapid
pulse.
Invasion of Damp-Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels
Acute earache, discharge from the ear, swollen glands, fever,
aversion to cold, headache, irritability, body aches, nausea,
indigestion, tongue with unilateral sticky yellow coating, Slippery-
Rapid pulse.
Residual Damp-Heat in the Lesser-Yang channels with
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Chronic earache which comes and goes, a feeling of pressure in the
ear, blocked ears, periodically slightly swollen glands, irritability,
insomnia, poor appetite, listlessness, pale face, Pale tongue with
unilateral sticky yellow coating, Soggy pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder and Liver channels
Chronic earache, loss of hearing, feeling of pressure in the ear,
blocked ears, slight bleeding of the ear drum on examination,
swollen glands, insomnia, irritability, hyperactivity, red face,
nervous child, Red tongue with redder sides and sticky yellow
coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Glue Ear
‘Glue ear’ is a condition characterized by accumulation of fluid
1995
behind the ear drum, which causes a blockage of the Eustachian
tube with the result that air cannot enter the middle ear. When this
occurs, the cells lining the middle ear begin to produce fluid,
which can be runny or thick, eventually filling the middle ear; this
may cause a severe decrease in hearing. Glue ear is most common
in children between 2 and 4 years old. Glue ear may be associated
with ear infections but it may also occur without.
Damp-Phlegm
Glue ear, decreased hearing, dull headaches, sinus problems, poor
concentration, listlessness, chronic catarrh, Swollen tongue with a
sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Dampness
Glue ear, decreased hearing, dull frontal headaches, sinus
problems, listlessness, tongue with sticky coating, Slippery pulse.
Other symptoms and signs depend on whether Dampness is
associated with Cold or Heat.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Both earache and glue ear in children are nearly
always due to residual Dampness in the ears.
• 
 
This usually occurs when a child suffers repeated
invasions of Wind which are treated with antibiotics.
HOT PALMS AND SOLES
Accumulation Disorder with Spleen deficiency
Hot palms and soles, thin body, sallow complexion, withered hair,
a desire to lie down, an increased desire to suckle, abdominal
distension and fullness, red face, irritability, a feeling of heat in the
afternoon, night sweating, restlessness at night, loose stools,
turbid urine, sticky tongue coating, Weak-Soft pulse.
‘Accumulation Disorder’ is a paediatric condition characterized
by accumulation of food in the stomach; it is equivalent to
1996
‘retention of food’ in adults.
Blood and Yin deficiency
Hot palms and soles, listlessness, thin body, dry cough, dry mouth,
a feeling of heat in the afternoon, malar flush, night sweating,
mental restlessness, dry stools, tongue without coating, Floating-
Empty pulse.
CONSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESS
Constitutional weakness in children may manifest with slow
mental development, early-onset asthma, early-onset myopia, thin
body, poor muscle development, early-onset whooping cough,
fearfulness, or crying at night.
Heart deficiency
Quiet child, bluish tinge on the forehead, fearful, crying at night,
pale-bluish cheeks, palpitations, cold limbs.
This condition may be due to the mother eating Wind-producing
foods, which dry out the fetus’s Blood and weaken its Heart. Wind-
producing foods include shrimps, prawns, crab, lobster and all
shellfish, spinach and mushrooms. A constitutional Heart
deficiency may also be due to the mother suffering a severe shock
during pregnancy.
Liver deficiency
Tense child, early-onset myopia and headaches, sinewy body,
greenish complexion, crying, a history of convulsions in infancy,
twitching during sleep, crying at night, desire to suckle frequently,
contraction of the tendons, ridged nails.
This condition may be due to the mother suffering an emotional
upset and anger during pregnancy.
Spleen deficiency
Quiet child, poor muscle development, flaccid muscles, sallow
complexion, pale lips, cold limbs, poor digestion, poor appetite,
crying with a low sound, loose stools, vomiting, diarrhoea.
1997
This condition may be due to the mother eating too many
Phlegm-producing foods or to overworking during pregnancy.
Lung deficiency
Quiet child, fearful, pale complexion, shortness of breath, crying
with weak sound, moaning, weeping, cold hands, lustreless flaccid
skin, thin chest, early-onset asthma/eczema, Lung cracks on the
tongue.
This condition may be due to the mother suffering from sadness
or grief during pregnancy.
Kidney deficiency
Quiet child, lassitude, thin body, slow mental and physical
development, early-onset myopia, weak limbs, early-onset
asthma/eczema, frequent urination, feeling cold, nocturnal
enuresis after the age of 3 years. This condition is usually due to a
Kidney-Essence deficiency of both parents.
CONSTIPATION IN INFANCY
Fetus Heat
Constipation in infancy, no desire to suckle, crying, crying at night,
irritability, red face, dry lips, abdominal pain, dark urine.
Constitutional weakness
Constipation in infancy, listlessness, poor appetite, tendency to be
easily startled, crying at night with weak sound, pale complexion.
URINATION PROBLEMS
Retention Of Urine In Infancy
Heat in the Bladder
Retention of urine, dark urine, irritability, crying, dry lips.
1998
Deficiency of Original Qi
Retention of urine, quiet child, pale face, listlessness, crying with a
low sound, pale complexion, pale lips, slow development.
Nocturnal Enuresis
Urination in bed at night in children constitutes ‘nocturnal
enuresis’ only in children over the age of 3 years.
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Nocturnal enuresis, quiet child, a feeling of cold, bright-white
complexion, tiredness, abundant clear urination, Pale and wet
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
In children, this is usually a constitutional Kidney-Yang
deficiency and, due to their age, there will not be many Kidney-
deficiency symptoms. Indeed, if a child suffers from nocturnal
enuresis and the tongue is Pale and the Kidney pulse is Weak,
these signs are enough to diagnose a constitutional Kidney-Yang
deficiency. This child will usually be a quiet, shy child without
much energy.
Liver-Fire
Nocturnal enuresis, tense and highly-strung child, headaches,
dizziness, tinnitus, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark urine, Red tongue
with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency
Nocturnal enuresis, tiredness, poor appetite, loose stools, poor
digestion, chronic weak cough, weak voice, sweating, Pale tongue,
Weak pulse.
 
Clinical note
• 
 
Remember
 
: nocturnal enuresis is not always due to a
constitutional Kidney deficiency. In a tense, nervous
child with a Red tongue, think of Liver-Fire as a possible
cause. If so, use HE-7 Shenmen and LIV-2 Xingjian.
1999
CRYING
Spleen deficient and cold
Crying with a weak sound, arching of the back, crying without
tears, a desire to lie down, pale bluish complexion, abdominal
pain, poor appetite, pale lips, Pale tongue, Deep- Weak-Slow pulse.
Heart-Heat
Crying with a loud sound, irritability, insomnia, crying at night,
crying as soon as the light is switched on, dark urine, red face, red
lips, Red tongue with yellow coating.
Heart deficiency
Crying with a low sound, crying at night, tendency to be easily
startled, pale-bluish complexion, quietness, thin body, pale lips,
Pale tongue.
Shock
Crying, crying at night, grimacing, tendency to be easily startled,
bluish tinge on the forehead, crying when left alone, white foam
emerging from the corners of the mouth, bluish lips, clinging to
the mother.
Retention of food
Crying with a loud sound, crying after eating, crying at night,
abdominal fullness and hardness, vomiting, absence of desire to
suckle, loose stools with foul smell.
Crying At Night In Babies
Spleen deficient and cold
Crying at night with low sound, a preference for lying on the
stomach, falling asleep easily but waking up, arching the back
whilst crying, cold limbs, poor appetite, loose stools, bright-white
complexion.
2000
Heart-Heat
Crying at night with loud sound, a preference for sleeping on the
back, difficulty in falling asleep, crying and then stopping when
lights are turned on, irritability, dark urine, red face, red lips.
Shock
Crying at night, tendency to be easily frightened, fear of going to
sleep, waking up frightened during the night, bluish tinge on
forehead, pale-bluish face and lips, clinging to the mother.
DISTURBED SLEEP
Liver-Fire
Disturbed sleep, waking up during the night, excessive dreaming,
nightmares, night sweating, headaches, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, red face, thirst, bitter taste, constipation, dark
urine, Red tongue with redder sides and dry yellow coating, Wiry-
Rapid pulse.
Heart-Fire
Disturbed sleep, waking up during the night, excessive dreaming,
nightmares, palpitations, thirst, agitation, a feeling of heat, red
face, bitter taste, Red tongue with redder tip and yellow coating,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Residual pathogenic factor (Heat)
Disturbed sleep after a febrile episode, a feeling of tightness of the
chest, irritability, hypochondrial pain, tongue Red in the front,
Wiry-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food
Disturbed sleep, excessive dreaming, night sweating, epigastric
fullness, undigested food in the stools, sour regurgitation,
vomiting, thick sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
2001
Stomach-Heat
Disturbed sleep, excessive dreaming, night sweating, burning
epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, Red tongue with a yellow
coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Shock
Disturbed sleep, tendency to be easily frightened, fear of going to
sleep, waking up frightened during the night, bluish tinge on
forehead, pale-bluish face and lips, clinging to the mother.
ACCUMULATION DISORDER
‘Accumulation Disorder’ is a typical children’s problem
characterized by retention of food and slow digestion. It is very
common early in life because the Spleen and Stomach energy are
always weak in small children and they get stronger as they grow
up. Accumulation Disorder is equivalent to ‘retention of food’ in
adults and is characterized by poor digestion, abdominal full- 
ness
and pain, poor appetite, vomiting and diarrhoea. Accumulation
Disorder in babies is usually due to not breast-feeding, breast-
feeding for too short a time or weaning too early.
Stagnation of food
Babies: vomiting of curdled milk, no appetite, milky film on palate,
foul-smelling stools, restlessness, whining, red cheeks.
Children: vomiting of undigested food, abdominal pain relieved
by bowel movement, irritability, crying, low-grade fever, sweating
at night, sallow complexion, a burning sensation in the palms,
thick sticky tongue coating, Slippery pulse.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with retention of food
Sallow complexion, poor digestion, poor appetite, listlessness,
slight abdominal pain and fullness, loose stools, vomiting, restless
sleep, sleepiness during the daytime, Pale tongue with sticky
coating, Weak-Slippery pulse.
2002
WORMS
Pinworms
Abdominal pain that comes and goes, gurgling in the intestines,
vomiting, profuse urination, itching of the anus at night, sweaty
perineum, vaginal itching in girls, sallow complexion, thin body,
poor appetite, a desire to eat strange objects such as soil, raw rice,
tea leaves or paper, white spots on the face, small grey spots in the
eyes, small spots under the lips, red points on the tongue.
Roundworms
Abdominal pain, vomiting, listlessness, thin body, sallow
complexion, white spots on the face, small grey spots in the eyes,
darkness under the eyes, itchy nose, small spots below the lips, red
points on the tongue, a desire to eat strange objects, constipation
or loose stools, abdominal distension.
FIVE FLACCIDITIES
‘Five Flaccidities’ is called 
wu ruan
 
in Chinese, which literally
means ‘five softnesses’: these are flaccidity of the head and neck
(cannot keep the head up), flaccidity of the mouth (dribbling and
difficulty in chewing), flaccidity of the arms (cannot hold objects),
flaccidity of the legs (cannot stand up), and flaccidity of the
muscles.
Constitutional Kidney deficiency
Five Flaccidities, cannot hold the head up or straight, head leaning
to one side, dificulty in walking, mental retardation, inability to
stand up, frequent urination, inability to grasp objects, pale lips,
Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Constitutional Spleen deficiency
Five Flaccidities, especially flaccid muscles, poor digestion, poor
appetite, listlessness, sleepiness, inability to grasp objects,
dificulty in speaking, open mouth, slow development, dificulty in
2003
walking, mental retardation, sallow complexion, Pale tongue, Weak
pulse.
FIVE RETARDATIONS
The ‘Five Retardations’ indicate late development in children, in
standing, walking, teeth development, growth of hair and speech.
The slow development is due to a combination of prenatal and
postnatal deficiency. The Five Retardations are called 
wu chi
 
in
Chinese. The organs involved in the pathology of the Five
Retardations are the Kidneys (lateness in being able to stand, slow
teeth and hair development), Liver (lateness in being able to stand
and walk), Heart (slowness in speech development) and Stomach
(lateness in being able to walk).
Cold fetus
Five Retardations, a feeling of cold, cold body, cold limbs, lying
stiff, pale-bluish complexion, shortness of breath, crying with low
sound, dificulty in suckling, pale lips, Pale and wet tongue, Deep-
Slow pulse.
Liver and Spleen deficiency
Five Retardations, poor appetite, abdominal distension, blue veins
in the abdomen, flaccid muscles, pale-greenish complexion, Pale
tongue, Weak pulse.
INFLAMMATIONS
Acute Skin Rash
Wind-Heat at Defensive-Qi level
Acute skin rash that starts on the head and then spreads rapidly to
the trunk and finally to the limbs, red 
papules, low fever, itching,
swelling behind the ears, swollen tonsils, cough, sneezing, yellow
nasal discharge, sore throat, red eyes, tongue Red in the
front/sides with red points, Floating-Rapid pulse.
2004
Heat at the Qi level
Acute rash, high fever, red papules with dense distribution,
intense thirst, sweating, mental restlessness, dry stools, dark
urine, Red tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing pulse.
Erysipelas
Toxic Heat on the Exterior
Erysipelas, fever, sticky discharge in the corner of the eyes,
convulsions, crying, bright-red macular rash, hardened skin that is
hot and painful to touch, restlessness, Red tongue with red points
and with yellow coating.
Toxic Heat in the Interior
Erysipelas, high fever at night, mental restlessness, crying, dry
mouth, a feeling of fullness of the chest, delirium, fainting, coarse
breathing, blurred vision, dull dark-red or purple macular rash,
skin hot and painful to touch, Red tongue with red points and
without coating.
JAUNDICE
Damp-Heat
Jaundice, bright-yellow skin, bright-yellow eyes like tangerine
peel, sweating, dark urine, fever, thirst, abdominal fullness and
distension, pale stools, listlessness, poor appetite, sticky yellow
tongue coating.
Cold-Dampness
Jaundice, dull-yellow skin, dull-yellow eyes, listlessness, a desire to
lie down, poor appetite, abdominal fullness and distension, pale
stools, loose stools, pale urine, sticky white tongue coating.
INFECTIONS
2005
Chickenpox
Wind-Heat at the Defensive-Qi level
Chickenpox, vesicles like dew filled with clear fluid, headache,
fever, runny nose with white discharge, cough, sneezing, tongue
Red on the sides/front with white coating, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat
Chickenpox, dull-coloured vesicles which are red around the edge,
filled with a turbid fluid and with a dense distribution, fever,
mental restlessness, thirst, red face, red lips, tongue ulcers, dark
urine, Red tongue with thick, dry yellow coating and red points,
Deep-Rapid pulse.
Mumps
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Mumps, fever, shivers, headache, cough, sore throat, pain, redness
and swelling behind the ears, tongue Red on the sides/front with
red points, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Toxic Heat at the Qi level
Mumps, high fever, a feeling of heat, irritability, headache, thirst,
red lips, vomiting, swelling, redness, pain and hardness behind
the ears, sore throat, swollen tonsils, constipation, dark urine, Red
tongue with thick yellow coating and red points, Deep-Full-
Slippery pulse.
FLAPPING OF NOSTRILS
Wind-Heat in the Lung Defensive-Qi portion
Flapping of nostrils, sore throat, cough, fever, shivers, slight thirst,
slight sweating, tongue Red on the sides or front with white
coating, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
2006
Flapping of nostrils, barking cough with profuse, sticky yellow or
green sputum, shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, a feeling of heat, thirst, Red and Swollen
tongue with a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Lung and Kidney deficiency
Flapping of nostrils, shortness of breath, shallow breathing, dull-
pale complexion, listlessness, sweating, cold limbs, Pale tongue,
Deep-Weak pulse.
CONVULSIONS
Acute
An old paediatric book mentions eight characteristics of ‘acute
convulsions’: twitching of the limbs, open 
hands, pulling of the
head towards the shoulder, tremor of the limbs, arching of the
body, stretching of the hands, the eyes turning up, and blurred
vision.
Invasion of Wind with penetration of Heat at the Qi level
Acute convulsions, tremor of the limbs, high fever, sweating,
headache, cough, red face, irritability, mental confusion, delirium,
dark urine, constipation, abdominal fullness and pain, Red tongue
with yellow coating and red spots, Deep-Full pulse.
Phlegm-Heat
Acute convulsions, fever, hot body, red face, irritability, thirst,
cough with expectoration of yellow sputum, shortness of breath,
wheezing, clenching of teeth, dark urine, dry stools, Red tongue
with sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
Retention of food
Acute convulsions, sallow complexion, vomiting, abdominal
fullness and pain, constipation, foul breath, rattling sound in the
throat, thick, sticky yellow tongue coating, Slippery-Rapid pulse.
2007
Shock
Acute convulsions, no fever, bluish complexion, cold hands,
tendency to be easily startled, insomnia or sleepiness with
dificulty in being aroused and crying after waking up, crying at
night, Moving pulse.
Chronic
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Chronic convulsions, slight tremor of limbs which comes and goes,
thin body, malar flush, mental restlessness, insomnia, five-palm
heat, night sweating, Red tongue without coating, Floating-Empty
and Rapid pulse.
Stomach- and Spleen-Yang deficiency
Chronic convulsions, eyes turning up, sleepiness, wet glazed eyes,
mental confusion, listlessness, sallow complexion, cold limbs,
loose stools, Pale tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Chronic convulsions, slight tremor of the limbs which comes and
goes, listlessness, sleepiness, sallow complexion, sunken
fontanelle, sweating, cold limbs, loose stools, weak breathing, Pale
tongue, Deep-Weak pulse.
FETUS TOXIN
According to Chinese medicine, most fetuses absorb toxin in the
uterus and develop Toxic Heat: this is all the more likely to happen
when the mother eats too many hot and spicy foods, suffers an
invasion of Toxic Heat or has a shock during pregnancy.
Fetus Toxin Heat
Fever, hot body, red face and eyes, mouth closed, noisy breathing,
swollen eyes, shortness of breath, crying, tendency to be easily
startled, dark urine, dry stools.
2008
Fetus Toxin Cold
Pale face, mental confusion, sleepiness, shortness of breath, cold
body, cold limbs, abdominal pain, crying, mouth open.
Fetus Toxin convulsions
Convulsions, body hot, face bluish, clenched teeth, shortness of
breath, wheezing, stiffness of body, eyes turning up, grimacing.
Fetus Toxin jaundice
Jaundice, golden-yellow skin and eyes, hot body, dark urine,
crying.
FONTANELLES
Sunken Fontanelles
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
Sunken fontanelle, late closure of fontanelle, quiet child, cold
limbs, listlessness, poor appetite.
Exhaustion of Qi and Fluids
Sunken fontanelle, dry skin, listlessness, crying at night.
Raised Fontanelles
Toxic Heat
Raised and swollen fontanelle like a heap, soft to touch, red skin
over the fontanelle, headache, thirst, crying, sweating, red face and
lips, shortness of breath, dark 
urine, Red tongue with red points
and dry, thick yellow coating, Rapid-Overflowing pulse.
Cold in the Interior
Raised fontanelle, which is hard to touch, white skin over the
fontanelle, dull-pale complexion, cold limbs, possibly twitching of
the limbs, Pale tongue, Deep-Tight pulse.
2009
Late Closure Of Fontanelles
Observation,
 
Chapter 5
The posterior fontanelle usually closes about 2 months after
birth; the sphenoid fontanelle closes at about 3 months, the
mastoid one closes near the end of the first year, and the anterior
fontanelle may not close completely until the middle or end of the
second year.
Kidney-Essence deficiency
Late closure of fontanelle, listlessness, weak and quiet child, slow
mental and physical development.
Spleen deficiency
Late closure of fontanelle, listlessness, poor digestion, poor
appetite, quiet child, loose stools.
WHITE SPOTS ON THE PALATE AND
TONGUE
Heat in Spleen and Heart
White spots on the palate and tongue like snow, red face, red lips,
thirst, irritability, insomnia, crying, palpitations, dark urine, Red
tongue with yellow coating, Overflowing-Rapid pulse.
Spleen- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
White spots on palate and tongue like snow, listlessness, poor
development, malar flush, dry mouth, tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
LONG PENIS
Observation,
 
Chapter 17
Congenital Kidney-Yin deficiency
2010
Long penis, slow development, lateness in walking and standing,
slow growth of the teeth, normal coloured tongue without coating,
Floating-Empty pulse.
Spleen-Qi sinking
Long penis, a feeling of bearing down in the abdomen, tiredness,
lassitude, poor appetite, loose stools, failure to thrive, Pale tongue,
Empty pulse.
Phlegm and Blood stasis in the Lower Burner
Long penis, sputum in the throat, slow mental and speech
development, a feeling of oppression of the throat, abdominal
pain, Purple and Swollen tongue, Wiry-Slippery pulse.
Damp-Heat in the Liver channel
Long penis, fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or
hypogastrium, bitter taste, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, pain, redness and swelling of the scrotum,
genital, papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching, urinary
dificulty, burning on urination, dark urine, Red tongue with redder
sides and a sticky yellow coating, Slippery-Wiry-Rapid pulse.
2011
PART 6
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
2012
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
 
Part contents
SECTION 1
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE INTERNAL ORGANS
91. 
 
Heart
92. 
 
Spleen
93. 
 
Liver
94. 
 
Lungs
95. 
 
Kidneys
96. 
 
Small Intestine
97. 
 
Stomach
98. 
 
Gall-Bladder
99. 
 
Large Intestine
100. 
 
Bladder
SECTION 2
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
QI, BLOOD AND BODY FLUIDS
101. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
Qi, Blood, Yang and Yin
2013
102. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
Body Fluids
SECTION 3
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC FACTORS, FOUR LEVELS, SIX
STAGES AND THREE BURNERS
103. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
pathogenic factors
104. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Four Levels
105. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Six Stages
106. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Three Burners
107. 
 
Residual pathogenic factor
SECTION 4
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES, 12 CHANNELS, EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY VESSELS AND FIVE ELEMENTS
108. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Eight Principles
109. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the 12 channels
110. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Eight Extraordinary Vessels
111. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Five Elements
INTRODUCTION
2014
‘Identification of patterns’ indicates the process of identifying the
basic disharmony that underlies all clinical manifestations. This is
the essence of Chinese medical diagnosis and pathology. By
considering the picture that is formed by all the symptoms and
signs, we discern and identify the underlying pattern of
disharmony.
Identification of patterns thus involves forming an overall
picture of disharmony taking all symptoms and signs into
consideration. In this respect, Chinese medicine does not look for
causes but patterns. When we say that a patient presents with the
pattern of disharmony of Kidney-Yin deficiency, this is not the
cause of the disease (which has to be looked for in the person’s
life), but the disharmony underlying the disease. Of course, in
other respects, after identifying the pattern Chinese medicine does
go a step further in trying to identify a cause for the disharmony.
In the context of identification of patterns, ‘symptoms’ and
‘signs’ should be interpreted in a broad way. Included among them
are manifestations that are not ‘symptoms’ or ‘signs’ in Western
medicine (e.g. timidity, a weak voice, incapacity of making
decisions, lack of thirst, etc.).
In identifying patterns we follow the typical Chinese medical
philosophy of looking for relationships rather 
than linear causes.
Each symptom or sign has a meaning only in relation to all other
manifestations; therefore, a particular symptom can mean
different things in different situations. For example, the sign of
‘dry hair’ accompanied by night sweating, a feeling of heat in the
evening, a dry throat at night and a Red tongue without coating
indicates Yin deficiency, whereas ‘dry hair’ accompanied by
blurred vision, scanty periods and a Pale tongue indicates Blood
deficiency.
Identifying the pattern of disharmony blends diagnosis,
pathology and treatment principle all in one. When we say that a
certain pattern is characterized by Spleen-Yang deficiency with
retention of Dampness, we are defining the nature of the condition
(Yang deficiency), the site (Spleen) and, by implication, the
treatment principle, that is, tonify and warm the Spleen and
resolve Dampness.
In the particular case of external invasions, by identifying the
2015
pattern we indentify the cause of the disharmony (e.g. external
Wind), the nature of the condition (invasion of Wind), the site (the
Exterior of the body) and the treatment principle, that is, release
the Exterior and expel Wind. Thus, identifying the pattern (or
patterns) allows us to identify the nature and character of the
condition, the site of the disease, the treatment principle and the
prognosis (
Fig. P6.1
 
).
FIG. P6.1
 
Relationship between the cause of a disease, the
pattern of disharmony and the treatment principle
When identifying patterns, we should not only identify the
pattern but also understand how it arose and how different
aspects of it interact with each other. For example, if we identify a
pattern of Liver-Qi stagnation and also a pattern of Spleen-Qi
deficiency, we should go a step further and find out which pattern
started first, how the two patterns interact, which is primary and
whether one can be considered the cause of the other.
Patterns may be identified according to different aspects. These
are applicable in different situations and were formulated at
different times in the development of Chinese medicine. The
various modes of identifying patterns are:
 
• 
 
identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and
Body Fluids
• 
 
identification of patterns according to pathogenic
factors
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the Four Levels
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the Six Stages
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the Three
Burners
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the Eight
Principles
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the channels
• 
 
identification of patterns according to the Five
2016
Elements.
Each of these methods is applicable in different cases.
Identification of patterns according to Internal Organs
The identification of patterns according to the Internal Organs is
the most important means of diagnosing internal, chronic diseases
when the organs are involved. This identification of patterns is the
mainstay of everyday clinical practice.
Identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and
Body Fluids
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids describes the patterns emerging from a pathology in the
transformation, production and movement of Qi and Blood and in
the transformation, transportation and excretion of Body Fluids.
The pathology of Qi includes Qi deficiency, Qi stagnation, Qi
sinking and rebellious Qi. The pathology of Blood includes Blood
deficiency, Blood stasis, Blood-Heat, Cold in the Blood and
bleeding. The pathology of Body Fluids includes deficiency of Body
Fluids, Oedema and Phlegm (Dampness is discussed under the
identification of patterns according to pathogenic factors).
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids overlaps with that according to the Eight Principles and that
according to the Internal Organs. For example, the pattern of Qi
deficiency is the same as the eponymous one in the identification
of patterns according to the Eight Principles.
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids is useful to give a general idea about the state of Qi, Blood
and Body Fluids; it is complementary to the patterns of the
Internal Organs, which provide further detail. For example, the
pattern of Blood deficiency within the Qi, Blood and Body Fluids
patterns gives only the general symptoms and signs of Blood
deficiency and the Internal Organs patterns of Liver-Blood and
Heart-Blood deficiency identify the organ involved.
2017
Identification of patterns according to pathogenic
factors
The identification of patterns according to pathogenic factors
describes the patterns formed when the body is invaded by
external pathogenic factors such as Dampness, Wind, Cold,
Dryness and Summer-Heat. However, since the symptoms and
signs of the corresponding internal pathogenic factors are similar,
these are usually discussed within this type of identification of
pattern, which also includes the discussion of Fire as an internal
pathogenic factor.
Identification of patterns according to the Four Levels
The identification of patterns according to the Four Levels was
formulated primarily by Ye Tian Shi and described in his book
‘Discussion of Warm Diseases’ (
Wen Bing Lun
 
, 1746). It describes
the patterns arising when the patient is invaded by external Wind-
Heat. The patterns consist of Four Levels: the Defensive-Qi, Qi,
Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels. They describe four levels of Heat,
the first being external Wind-Heat and the other three internal
Heat.
Identification of patterns according to the Six Stages
This pattern identification is also very old as it is derived from
Zhang Zhong Jing’s ‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ (c. 
AD
220) (see Bibliography, Shang Han Lang Research Group). It
describes the patterns arising when the patient is invaded by
external Wind and especially Wind-Cold. It consists of six patterns,
which are the Greater Yang, Lesser Yang, Bright Yang, Greater Yin,
Lesser Yin and Terminal Yin.
Identification of patterns according to the Three
Burners
The identification of patterns according to the Three Burners is
quite similar to that according to the Four Levels. It was
formulated by Wu Ju Tong in the Qing dynasty. Many of the
patterns are essentially the same as those of the Four Levels,
except that they are seen from the perspective of the Three
2018
Burners, that is, the patterns of the Upper Burner, Middle Burner
and Lower Burner. The Middle Burner patterns correspond to the
Qi level, whereas those of the Lower Burner correspond to the
Nutritive-Qi and Blood levels. By contrast, the patterns of the
Upper Burner encompass the Defensive-Qi, Qi and Nutritive-Qi
levels.
Identification of patterns according to the Eight
Principles
Elements of this method of identification of patterns are found
throughout Chinese medical texts starting from the ‘Yellow
Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’ and the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Disorders’. In its present form, this method of
identifying patterns was formulated by Cheng Zhong Ling in the
early Qing dynasty.
Identification of patterns according to the Eight Principles is
based on the categories of Interior/Exterior, Heat/Cold, Full/Empty
and Yin/Yang. It is the summarization of all other modes of
identifying patterns and is applicable in all cases for both interior
and exterior diseases.
Identification of patterns according to the channels
This is actually the oldest of the methods of pattern identification
as it is described in 
Chapter 10
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’. It describes
the symptoms and signs arising from the channel, when the
organs are not affected.
Identification of patterns according to the Five
Elements
The identification of patterns according to the Five Elements
describes the patterns of disharmony purely from the point of
view of the Five Elements. This is useful as a general indication for
two reasons: first, it can help us to plot the progression of a
pathological condition from one Element to the other (bearing in
mind that a progression along the Controlling cycle is more
serious); secondly, the Five-Element patterns are sometimes useful
to form a picture of the mental–spiritual condition of the patient.
2019
SECTION 1
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING
TO THE
INTERNAL
ORGANS
2020
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE INTERNAL
ORGANS
 
Section contents
91. 
 
Heart
92. 
 
Spleen
93. 
 
Liver
94. 
 
Lungs
95. 
 
Kidneys
96. 
 
Small Intestine
97. 
 
Stomach
98. 
 
Gall-Bladder
99. 
 
Large Intestine
100. 
 
Bladder
2021
INTRODUCTION
The identification of patterns according to the Internal Organs is
based on the clinical manifestations arising when the Qi and Blood
of the Internal Organs are out of balance. This method of
identification is used mostly for interior and chronic conditions
but it also includes a few exterior and acute conditions.
The Internal Organs patterns are an application of the Eight-
Principle method of identification to the particular disharmonies
of specific Internal Organs. For example, according to the Eight-
Principle pattern identification, the symptoms and signs of Qi
deficiency are shortness of breath, a weak voice, a pale face,
tiredness and poor appetite. Although useful to diagnose a
condition of Qi deficiency, this is not detailed enough and does not
identify the organ involved. It is therefore too general to give an
indication of the treatment needed. According to the Internal-
Organ pattern identification, the above symptoms can be further
classified as Lung-Qi deficiency (shortness of breath and a weak
voice) and Spleen-Qi deficiency (tiredness and poor appetite). This
is more useful in clinical practice because it gives an indication as
to which organ needs to be treated.
Let us now look at some of the characteristics and points of
attention of the identification of patterns according to the Internal
Organs.
 
1. 
 
In the following pages, the Internal Organs are
described in as much detail as possible. It is important
to remember, however, that not all symptoms and signs
listed need to be present to diagnose those patterns.
The patterns listed actually describe advanced cases of
Internal Organs patterns. As such a case develops
gradually over several years, in the beginning stages
there will be relatively few symptoms and signs.
Sometimes, just a few symptoms are enough to
diagnose a certain pattern. For example, scanty periods
and blurred vision in a woman may be enough to
diagnose Liver-Blood deficiency; similarly if she suffers
from blurred vision and her tongue is Pale on the sides.
2. 
 
It should not be forgotten that the pulse is a sign that
2022
is part of the constellation of symptoms and signs
forming a pattern. Indeed, the pulse is a very important
sign and one can sometimes diagnose a pattern simply
on the basis of the pulse. For example, if the Kidney
pulse on both left and right positions is 
consistently
Weak, I interpret that as a sign of a Kidney deficiency
even in the absence of any other symptom and sign.
3. 
 
Within the Yin-deficiency patterns, I list two separate
patterns, that is, a pattern of Yin deficiency without
Empty-Heat and a pattern of Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat. Although Empty-Heat does eventually arise from
Yin deficiency, in the beginning stages there is usually
Yin deficiency without Empty-Heat. Besides the
symptoms of Heat, the tongue is an important sign
indicating whether there is Empty-Heat or not: if it is
Red (without coating), this indicates that there is Empty-
Heat; if it is without coating (but is not Red), this
indicates Yin deficiency without Empty-Heat. In other
words, it is important to remember that the Yin
deficiency on the tongue is indicated by the lack of
coating (
not
 
its redness) and Empty-Heat is indicated by
its redness (of course associated with the lack of
coating).
4. 
 
The organ patterns are not ‘pigeon holes’ into which
we fit symptoms and signs. In practice, it is essential to
have an understanding of the aetiology, pathology and
interaction of patterns. The aim of the identification of
patterns according to Internal Organs, therefore, is to
understand how symptoms and signs arose and how
they interact with each other.
5. 
 
There is absolutely no direct correspondence
between Internal Organ patterns and Western diseases.
Each Western disease may manifest itself with many
different patterns and each pattern may give rise to
various Western diseases.
    
 
Furthermore, there is no direct correspondence
between an organ pattern in Chinese medicine and an
organ disease in Western medicine. For example, a
2023
person may suffer from Kidney-Yin deficiency without
any sign of kidney disease in Western medicine; vice
versa, a person may suffer from a kidney inflammation
from a Western point of view but a pattern of Bladder
Damp-Heat from the perspective of Chinese medicine.
6. 
 
Most patients suffer from a combination of Internal
Organs patterns. The most frequent ones are:
(a) 
 
two or more patterns from the same
organs, either Yin or Yang (e.g. Liver-Qi
stagnation with Liver-Yang rising, and
Stomach-Yin deficiency with rebellious
Stomach-Qi)
(b) 
 
two or more patterns from different
organs, either Yin or Yang (e.g. Liver-Fire
and Heart-Fire, and Stomach-Heat with
Gall-Bladder Damp-Heat)
(c) 
 
one or more patterns of a Yin organ
with one or more of a Yang organ (e.g.
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Bladder
Damp-Heat)
(d) 
 
an interior with an exterior pattern (e.g.
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs with
invasion of exterior Wind in the Lungs
Defensive-Qi portion)
(e) 
 
an organ pattern with a channel pattern
of the related channel (e.g. Dampness in
the Large Intestine with Painful
Obstruction Syndrome of the Large
Intestine channel)
(f) 
 
an organ pattern with a channel pattern
of an unrelated channel (e.g. Lung-Qi
deficiency with stagnation of Qi in the
2024
Bladder channel).
2025
CHAPTER 91
 
HEART
CHAPTER CONTENTS
HEART-QI DEFICIENCY
HEART-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Heart-Yang deficiency
Heart-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
HEART-YANG COLLAPSE
HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
HEART-QI AND HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Heart-Yin deficiency
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty Heat
HEART-QI AND HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY
DEFICIENCY OF BOTH HEART-YANG AND HEART-YIN
HEART-QI STAGNATION
HEART-FIRE BLAZING
PHLEGM PATTERNS
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart
Phlegm misting the Mind
HEART-BLOOD STASIS
2026
HEART-VESSEL OBSTRUCTION
WATER OVERFLOWING TO THE HEART
TURBID DAMPNESS SURROUNDING THE HEART
COMBINED PATTERNS
HEART-QI DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, pale face, tiredness,
slight depression, spontaneous sweating.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Empty.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, P-6 Neiguan, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-17 Shanzhong, Ren-6
Qihai.
Prescription
Bao Yuan Tang 
Preserving the Source Decoction
 
.
HEART-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Heart-Yang Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, tiredness, slight
depression, spontaneous sweating, a slight feeling of discomfort or
stuffiness in the heart region, a feeling of cold, cold hands, bright-
pale face, slightly dark lips.
2027
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Deep-Weak, in severe cases Knotted.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, P-6 Neiguan, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-17 Shanzhong, Ren-6
Qihai, Du-14 Dazhui.
Prescription
Rou Fu Bao Yuan Tang 
Cinnamomum-Aconitum Preserving the Source
Decoction
 
.
Heart-Yang Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, a feeling of oppression of the chest, sputum in the
throat, dizziness, tiredness, cold hands, numbness of the limbs,
oedema of the hands, muzziness (fuzziness) of the head, poor
memory, a feeling of heaviness, depression.
Tongue
Pale, wet and Swollen.
Pulse
Weak but slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-8 Shenque, Du-4 Mingmen, ST-
36 Zusanli, P-6 Neiguan, BL-23 Shenshu, Du-14 Dazhui, BL-15
Xinshu, ST-40 Fenglong, Ren-12 Zhongwan, P-5 Jianshi, Ren-17
Shanzhong.
Prescription
Ling Gui Zhu Gan Tang 
Poria-Ramulus Cinnamomi-Atractylodes-
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
 
plus Yi Yi Ren 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
.
2028
HEART-YANG COLLAPSE
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, shortness of breath, weak and shallow breathing,
profuse sweating, cold limbs, cyanosis of the lips, greyish-white
complexion, in severe cases coma.
Tongue
Very Pale or Bluish-Purple, Short.
Pulse
Hidden-Minute.
Acupuncture
Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-8 Shenque, Du-4 Mingmen, ST-
36 Zusanli, P-6 Neiguan, BL-23 Shenshu, Du-20 Baihui, Du-14
Dazhui, BL-15 Xinshu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Shen Fu Tang 
Ginseng-Aconitum Decoction
 
.
HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale
complexion, pale lips.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Choppy or Fine.
Acupuncture
2029
HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-4
Guanyuan, BL-17 Geshu (with moxa), BL-20 Pishu.
Prescription
Shen Qi Si Wu Tang 
Ginseng-Astragalus Four Substances Decoction.
HEART-QI AND HEART-BLOOD
DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, shortness of breath, spontaneous sweating,
depression, anxiety, tiredness, dull-pale complexion, insomnia.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Weak or Choppy.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15
Jiuwei, Ren-4 Guanyuan, BL-17 Geshu (with moxa), BL-20 Pishu,
BL-15 Xinshu.
Prescription
Ba Zhen Tang 
Eight Precious Decoction
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
.
HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Heart-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness,
2030
uneasiness, dry mouth and throat in the afternoon or evening.
Tongue
Normal-coloured without coating or with rootless coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty, especially in the left- Front position.
Acupuncture
HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-4
Guanyuan, HE-6 Yinxi, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-7 Fuliu, KI-6 Zhaohai.
Prescription
Tian Wang Bu Xin Dan 
Heavenly Emperor Tonifying the Heart Pill
 
.
Heart-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor memory,
anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, mental restlessness,
uneasiness, ‘feeling hot and bothered’, dry mouth and throat in
the evening, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, night sweating, five-palm heat.
Tongue
Red, redder on the tip, without coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty, especially on the left-Front position and Rapid.
Acupuncture
HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-4
Guanyuan, HE-6 Yinxi, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-7 Fuliu, KI-6 Zhaohai, P-
7 Daling, LI-11 Quchi, HE-9 Shaochong.
Prescription
Tian Wang Bu Xin Dan 
Heavenly Emperor Tonifying the Heart Pill
2031
plus Mu Dan Pi 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
.
HEART-QI AND HEART-YIN
DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, slight
breathlessness, tiredness, insomnia, mental restlessness, sweating
on exertion, dry throat, night sweating.
Tongue
Normal-coloured without coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15
Jiuwei, Ren-4 Guanyuan, HE-6 Yinxi, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-15 Xinshu.
Prescription
Zhi Gan Cao Tang 
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
Sheng Mai San 
Generating the Pulse Powder.
DEFICIENCY OF BOTH HEART-YANG
AND HEART-YIN
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, tendency to be easily startled, shortness of breath, a
slight feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of cold, cold
limbs, mental restlessness, night sweating, poor memory, malar
flush.
Tongue
2032
Pale or Red without coating depending on whether Yang or Yin
deficiency predominates.
Pulse
Weak or Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, HE-7 Shenmen, Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-15 Xinshu,
Ren-15 Jiuwei, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli.
Prescription
Zhi Gan Cao Tang 
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
 
.
HEART-QI STAGNATION
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, a feeling of distension or oppression of the chest,
depression, a slight feeling of a lump in the throat, slight
shortness of breath, sighing, poor appetite, chest and upper
epigastric distension, dislike of lying down, weak and cold limbs,
slightly purple lips, pale complexion.
Tongue
Slightly Pale-Purple on the sides in the chest area.
Pulse
Empty but very slightly Overflowing on the left Front position.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-17
Shanzhong, LU-7 Lieque, ST-40 Fenglong, LI-4 Hegu.
Prescription
Mu Xiang Liu Qi Yin 
Aucklandia Flowing Qi Decoction
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
2033
HEART-FIRE BLAZING
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, thirst, mouth and tongue ulcers, mental restlessness,
a feeling of agitation, insomnia, 
dream-disturbed sleep, a feeling
of heat, red face, dark urine or blood in the urine, bitter taste (after
a bad night’ sleep).
Tongue
Red with redder tip and yellow coating. In more severe cases the
tip could also be swollen.
Pulse
Overflowing-Rapid especially on the left Front position. It could
also be Hasty (rapid and stopping at irregular intervals).
Acupuncture
HE-9 Shaochong, HE-8 Shaofu, HE-7 Shenmen, Ren-15 Jiuwei, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, KI-6 Zhaohai, LI-11 Quchi, Du-24 Shenting, Du-19
Houding.
Prescription
Xie Xin Tang 
Draining the Heart Decoction.
PHLEGM PATTERNS
Phlegm-Fire Harassing The Heart
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, mental restlessness, thirst, red face, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, dark urine, expectoration of phlegm,
rattling sound in the throat, bitter taste, insomnia, dream-
disturbed sleep, a feeling of agitation, mental confusion,
incoherent speech, rash behaviour, tendency to hit or scold people,
uncontrolled laughter or crying, shouting, muttering to oneself,
depression, manic behaviour.
2034
Tongue
Red with redder and swollen tip and a sticky yellow coating. In
severe cases there will be a deep Heart crack with a sticky, dry
yellow coating inside it.
Pulse
Slippery-Rapid or Slippery-Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
P-5 Jianshi, HE-7 Shenmen, HE-8 Shaofu, HE-9 Shaochong, P-7
Daling, Ren-15 Jiuwei, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40
Fenglong, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-20 Pishu, Du-20 Baihui, GB-13
Benshen, GB-17 Zhengying, Du-24 Shenting.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction.
Phlegm Misting The Mind
Clinical manifestations
Mental confusion, lethargic stupor, unconsciousness, incoherent
speech, vomiting of phlegm, rattling sound in the throat, aphasia,
mental depression, emotional lability, very dull eyes.
Tongue
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
Slippery.
Acupuncture
HE-9 Shaochong, P-5 Jianshi, BL-15 Xinshu, ST-40 Fenglong, Du-26
Renzhong, Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-20 Pishu, Du-20 Baihui, Du-14
Dazhui.
Prescription
Di Tan Tang 
Scouring Phlegm Decoction
2035
Gun Tan Wan 
Vapourizing Phlegm Pill
 
.
HEART-BLOOD STASIS
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, stabbing or pricking chest pain which may radiate to
the inner aspect of the left arm or to the shoulder, a feeling of
oppression or constriction of the chest, cyanosis of lips and nails,
cold hands.
Tongue
Purple in its entirety or only on the sides in the chest areas.
Pulse
Choppy, Wiry or Knotted. The pulse will be Knotted if Heart-Blood
stasis occurs against a background of severe Heart-Yang deficiency.
Acupuncture
P-6 Neiguan, P-4 Ximen, HE-7 Shenmen, Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-14
Jueyinshu, BL-17 Geshu, SP-10 Xuehai, KI-25 Shencang.
Prescription
Xue Fu Zhu Yu Tang 
Blood-Mansion Eliminating Stasis Decoction
 
.
HEART VESSEL OBSTRUCTION
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, shortness of breath with an inability to lie down,
depression, mental restlessness, a feeling of stuffiness under the
hypochondrium, a flustered feeling, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, stabbing or pricking pain in the heart region which comes
and goes, and which may radiate to the upper back or shoulder,
pain aggravated by exposure to cold and alleviated by heat,
expectoration of phlegm, epigastric or hypochondrial distension, a
feeling of heaviness, dislike of speaking, cold hands, sighing,
2036
purple lips, face and nails.
Tongue
Purple on the sides in the chest areas, Swollen with a sticky
coating.
Pulse
Wiry, Choppy or Knotted. It could also be Slippery if Phlegm is
predominant.
This is a complex pattern due to Qi stagnation, Blood stasis,
Cold and Phlegm occurring simultaneously.
Acupuncture
P-6 Neiguan, LU-7 Lieque, P-5 Jianshi, Ren-17 Shanzhong, LI-4
Hegu, ST-40 Fenglong, Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-14
Juque, BL-17 Geshu, BL-14 Jueyinshu, Du-14 Dazhui (with moxa).
Prescription
Zhi Shi Gua Lou Gui Zhi Tang 
Citrus-Trichosantes-Ramulus
Cinnamomi Decoction
 
plus Dan Shen 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
.
WATER OVERFLOWING TO THE
HEART
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, dizziness, nausea, vomiting of watery, frothy white
fluid, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, severe shortness of breath, a
feeling of fullness and stuffiness of the chest and epigastrium,
thirst with no desire to drink, urinary retention.
Tongue
Pale, Swollen and wet.
Pulse
Deep-Wiry or Deep-Fine-Slippery.
This pattern is seen only in the elderly.
2037
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, HE-6 Yinxi, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-9
Shuifen, KI-7 Fuliu, Ren-17 Shanzhong. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Ling Gui Zhu Gan Tang 
Poria-Ramulus Cinnamomi-Atractylodes-
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
 
.
Zhen Wu Tang 
True Warrior Decoction
 
.
TURBID DAMPNESS SURROUNDING
THE HEART
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, cold hands, scanty urination, oedema of the ankles,
sleepiness, mental confusion, sallow complexion, dizziness, frontal
headache, blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of oppression
of the chest, poor appetite, abdominal fullness, loose stools,
excessive salivation.
Tongue
Pale, Swollen with sticky white coating.
Pulse
Soggy or Deep-Slippery.
Acupuncture
HE-5 Tongli, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-17 Shanzhong, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
Ren-9 Shuifen, ST-28 Shuidao, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Wen Pi Tang 
Warming the Spleen Decoction
 
plus Su He Xiang Wan
Styrax Pill
 
.
COMBINED PATTERNS
2038
The Heart combined patterns are:
 
• 
 
Heart- and Liver-Blood deficiency (see under Liver
combined patterns)
• 
 
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency (see under Spleen
combined patterns)
• 
 
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-
Heat (see ‘Heart and Kidneys not harmonized’ under
Kidney combined patterns)
• 
 
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (see under Lung
combined patterns).
2039
CHAPTER 92
 
SPLEEN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
SPLEEN-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Spleen-Qi deficiency
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
SPLEEN-YANG DEFICIENCY
SPLEEN-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
SPLEEN-QI SINKING
SPLEEN NOT CONTROLLING BLOOD
SPLEEN-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Spleen-Yin deficiency
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
COLD-DAMPNESS IN THE SPLEEN
DAMP-HEAT IN THE SPLEEN
SPLEEN-HEAT
PHLEGM OBSTRUCTING THE MIDDLE BURNER
YIN FIRE FROM DEFICIENCY OF THE STOMACH AND SPLEEN
AND ORIGINAL QI
COMBINED PATTERNS
2040
Spleen- and Stomach-Qi deficiency
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency
Spleen- and Liver-Blood deficiency
Obstruction of the Spleen by Dampness with
stagnation of Liver-Qi
SPLEEN-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Spleen-Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight depression, tendency to obesity.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Empty.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
.
Spleen-Qi Deficiency With Dampness
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
2041
lassitude, pale or sallow complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, slight depression, tendency to obesity, abdominal fullness,
a feeling of heaviness, a sticky taste, poor digestion, undigested
food in the stools, nausea, dull frontal headache, excessive vaginal
discharge.
Tongue
Pale with sticky coating.
Pulse
Soggy.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, SP-9 Yinlingquan, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, ST-28
Shuidao.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
plus Yi Yi Ren 
Semen Coicis
lachryma jobi
Shi Pi Yin 
Bolster the Spleen Decoction
 
.
Spleen-Qi Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Nausea, vomiting of watery fluids, a feeling of oppression of the
chest and epigastrium, tiredness, poor appetite, a feeling of
heaviness, weak limbs, loose stools, dull-pale complexion, cold
limbs.
Tongue
Pale, Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
Soggy or Weak and slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
2042
Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-9 Shuifen, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-9
Yinglingquan, ST-40 Fenglong, BL-20 Pishu, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu.
Prescription
Liu Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
plus Er Chen Tang 
Two
Old Decoction
 
.
SPLEEN-YANG DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight depression, tendency to obesity, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
oedema.
Tongue
Pale and wet.
Pulse
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, SP-9 Yinlingquan, Ren-9 Shuifen, BL-22
Sanjiaoshu, ST-28 Shuidao, Ren-11 Jianli, ST-22 Guanmen. Moxa is
applicable.
Prescription
Li Zhong Tang 
Regulating the Centre Decoction
 
.
SPLEEN-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, dull-pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
2043
stools, depression, thin body, scanty periods or amenorrhoea,
insomnia, joint ache.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Choppy or Fine.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, Ren-4 Guanyuan, BL-17 Geshu (with direct
moxa).
Prescription
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
.
SPLEEN-QI SINKING
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
depression, tendency to obesity, a bearing-down sensation in the
abdomen, prolapse of the stomach, uterus, anus or bladder,
frequency and urgency of urination.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Weak.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, Du-20 Baihui, Ren-6 Qihai, ST-21
Liangmen, Du-1 Chengqiang. Moxa is applicable.
2044
Prescription
Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
.
SPLEEN NOT CONTROLLING BLOOD
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
depression, tendency to obesity, blood spots under the skin, blood
in the urine or stools, excessive uterine bleeding, sallow
complexion.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Weak or Fine.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, Du-20 
Baihui, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-17 Geshu,
SP-10 Xuehai, SP-1 Yinbai.
Prescription
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
.
SPLEEN-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Spleen-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, poor digestion, retching, gnawing hunger, loss of
sense of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth, dry lips, dry
stools, thin body, night sweating, sallow complexion with possibly
2045
red tip of the nose.
Tongue
Without coating, transversal cracks on the sides.
Pulse
Weak or Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Ma Zi Ren Wan 
Cannabis Pill
Wu Ren Wan 
Five-Seed Pill
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodes Powder
 
.
Spleen-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, poor digestion, retching, gnawing hunger, loss of
sense of taste, slight epigastric pain, dry mouth, dry lips, dry
stools, thin body, sallow complexion with possibly red tip of the
nose, malar flush, a feeling of heat in the evening, night sweating.
Tongue
Red without coating, transversal cracks on the sides.
Pulse
Floating-Empty and Rapid.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Ma Zi Ren Wan 
Cannabis Pill
Wu Ren Wan 
Five-Seed Pill
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodes Powder
 
plus
2046
(for any of the above prescriptions): Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae
asphodeloidis
 
.
COLD-DAMPNESS IN THE SPLEEN
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, a feeling of fullness of the epigastrium/abdomen, a
feeling of cold in the epigastrium which improves with the
application of heat, a feeling of heaviness of the head and body, a
sweetish taste or absence of taste, absence of thirst, loose stools,
lassitude, tiredness, nausea, oedema, dull-white complexion,
excessive white vaginal discharge.
Tongue
Pale with a sticky white coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Slow.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-3 Taibai,
ST-8 Touwei, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, BL-20 Pishu, Ren-9 Shuifen, Ren-11
Jianli, ST-22 Guanmen, ST-28 Shuidao.
Prescription
Ping Wei San 
Balancing the Stomach Powder
 
.
DAMP-HEAT IN THE SPLEEN
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of fullness of the epigastrium/lower abdomen,
epigastric/abdominal pain, poor appetite, a feeling of heaviness,
thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, vomiting, loose stools with
an offensive odour, burning sensation in the anus, a feeling of
heat, scanty dark urine, low-grade fever, dull headache with a
2047
feeling of heaviness of the head, dull-yellow complexion like
tangerine peel, yellow sclera of the eyes, oily sweat, bitter taste,
itchy skin or skin eruptions (papules or vesicles), sweating which
does not relieve the fever and does not lead to the clearing of Heat.
Tongue
Red with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Du-9 Zhiyang, LI-11 Quchi, BL-
20 Pishu, GB-34 Yanglingquan, Ren-9 Shuifen, Ren-11 Jianli, ST-22
Guanmen, ST-28 Shuidao, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu.
Prescription
Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
SPLEEN-HEAT
Clinical manifestations
Burning epigastric/abdominal pain, excessive hunger, red tip of the
nose, dry lips, mouth ulcers, thirst, dry stools, a feeling of heat,
scanty dark urine, yellow complexion.
Tongue
Red with dry yellow coating.
Pulse
Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-2 Dadu, LI-11 Quchi, ST-44
Neiting, Ren-11 Jianli, BL-20 Pishu.
2048
Prescription
Xie Huang San 
Draining the Yellow Powder
 
.
PHLEGM OBSTRUCTING THE MIDDLE
BURNER
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, poor
appetite, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting, gnawing hunger,
dizziness, a feeling of heaviness, loose stools.
Tongue
Swollen with a thick sticky coating in the centre.
Pulse
Slippery on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
Ren-10 Xiawan, ST-21 Liangmen, Ren-9 Shuifen, ST-22 Guanmen,
ST-40 Fenglong, SP-9 Yinglingquan.
Prescription
Er Chen Tang 
Two Old Decoction
 
.
YIN FIRE FROM DEFICIENCY OF THE
STOMACH AND SPLEEN AND
ORIGINAL QI
Clinical manifestations
Tiredness, a feeling of heat in the face but a feeling of cold in
general, alternating feelings of heat and cold, dry mouth, dry lips,
thirst, a feeling as if coming down with a cold, mouth ulcers,
insomnia, poor appetite, loose stools, weak limbs.
2049
Tongue
Pale
Pulse
Empty or slightly Overflowing but Empty.
Acupuncture
Ren-4 Guanyuan (moxa is applicable), Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36
Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, TB-5 Waiguan, BL-20 Pishu, BL-21
Weishu, P-6 Neiguan.
Prescription
Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
.
COMBINED PATTERNS
The Spleen Combined Patterns are:
 
• 
 
Spleen- and Stomach-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency
• 
 
Spleen- and Liver-Blood deficiency
• 
 
obstruction of the Spleen by Dampness with
stagnation of Liver-Qi (Spleen insulting the Liver).
Spleen- And Stomach-Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools, an
uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of sense of taste.
Tongue
Pale.
2050
Pulse
Empty, especially on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-
20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, Ren-6 Qihai. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodes Powder
 
.
Spleen- And Heart-Blood Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, 
dull-pale
complexion, pale lips, tiredness, weak muscles, loose stools, poor
appetite, scanty periods.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Choppy or Fine.
Acupuncture
HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Ren-4
Guanyuan, BL-17 Geshu (with moxa), BL-20 Pishu, Ren-12
Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
.
Spleen- And Lung-Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
2051
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose stools,
slight depression, tendency to obesity, slight shortness of breath,
slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, tendency to catch colds, dislike of cold.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Empty, especially on the right side.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-13 Feishu, Du-12
Shenzhu, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-3 Taibai, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, BL-20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
plus Huang Qi 
Radix
Astragali membranacei
 
.
Spleen- And Liver-Blood Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Poor appetite, slight abdominal distension after eating, tiredness,
lassitude, dull-pale complexion, weakness of the limbs, loose
stools, thin body, scanty periods or amenorrhoea, insomnia,
dizziness, numbness of the limbs, blurred vision, ‘floaters’ in eyes,
diminished night vision, pale lips, muscular weakness, cramps,
withered and brittle nails, dry hair and skin, slight depression, a
feeling of aimlessness.
Tongue
Pale body especially on the sides, which in extreme cases can
assume an orange colour, and Dry.
Pulse
2052
Choppy or Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-4 Guanyuan, BL-18 Ganshu,
BL-23 Shenshu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, BL-20
Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, BL-17 Geshu (with direct moxa).
Prescription
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
 
.
Obstruction Of The Spleen By Dampness
With Stagnation Of Liver-Qi
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of oppression and fullness of the epigastrium, nausea,
lack of appetite, loose stools, a feeling of heaviness, dry mouth
without a desire to drink, sallow complexion, hypochondrial pain,
bitter taste, a sticky taste, epigastric and hypochondrial distension,
irritability.
Tongue
Thick, sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Wiry.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-3 Taibai, BL-20 Pishu, LIV-13
Zhangmen, LIV-14 Qimen, GB-24 Riyue, GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-3
Taichong, ST-19 Burong, SP-9 Yinlingquan.
Prescription
Ping Wei San 
Balancing the Stomach Powder
 
plus Mu Xiang 
Radix
Aucklandiae lappae
 
and Xiang Fu 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
Huo Xiang Zheng Qi San 
Agastache Upright Qi Powder
 
plus Mu
Xiang 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
and Xiang Fu 
Rhizoma Cyperi
2053
rotundi
Yi Jia Jian Zheng Qi San 
First Variation of Upright Qi Powder
 
.
2054
CHAPTER 93
 
LIVER
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LIVER-QI STAGNATION PATTERNS
Stagnation of Liver-Qi
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm
REBELLIOUS LIVER-QI
LIVER-YANG RISING
LIVER-BLOOD STASIS
LIVER-FIRE BLAZING UPWARDS
DAMP-HEAT
Damp-Heat in the Liver
Damp-Heat in the Liver and Gall-Bladder
LIVER-WIND
Extreme Heat generating Wind
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind
Liver-Fire generating Wind
Liver-Blood deficiency giving rise to Wind
Liver-Wind harbouring Phlegm
2055
LIVER-BLOOD DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Liver-Blood deficiency
Liver-Blood deficiency with Phlegm
STAGNATION OF COLD IN THE LIVER CHANNEL
LIVER-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Liver-Yin deficiency
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
LIVER-QI DEFICIENCY
LIVER PHLEGM-FIRE
LIVER-YANG DEFICIENCY
COMBINED PATTERNS
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency
LIVER-QI STAGNATION PATTERNS
Stagnation Of Liver-Qi
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a slight feeling of
oppression of the chest, irritability, melancholy, depression,
moodiness, premenstrual tension, irregular periods, premenstrual
breast distension, a feeling of a lump in the throat.
Tongue
In light cases the tongue-body colour may not change; in severe
cases the sides will be red.
Pulse
2056
Wiry, especially on the left side.
Acupuncture
P-6 Neiguan, GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-13 Zhangmen, LIV-14
Qimen, LIV-3 Taichong, TB-6 Zhigou.
Prescription
Yue Ju Wan 
Gardenia-Ligusticum Pill
Xiao Yao San 
Free and Easy Wanderer Powder
 
.
Stagnant Liver-Qi Turning Into Heat
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial or epigastric distension, a slight feeling of
oppression of the chest, irritability, melancholy, depression,
moodiness, premenstrual tension, irregular periods, premenstrual
breast distension, a 
feeling of a lump in the throat, a feeling of
heat, red face, thirst, propensity to outbursts of anger, heavy
periods.
Tongue
Red on the sides.
Pulse
Wiry, especially on the left side and slightly Rapid.
Acupuncture
P-6 Neiguan, GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-13 Zhangmen, LIV-14
Qimen, LIV-3 Taichong, TB-6 Zhigou, LIV-2 Xingjian.
Prescription
Dan Zhi Xiao Yao San 
Moutan-Gardenia Free and Easy Wanderer
Powder
 
.
Liver-Qi Stagnation With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
2057
Mental depression, irritability, moodiness, a feeling of oppression
of the chest, a feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in
swallowing, sighing, cough with expectoration of phlegm,
hypochondrial distension, premenstrual breast distension,
swelling and pain.
Tongue
Swollen with a sticky coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Slippery.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, ST-40 Fenglong, LI-4 Hegu, Du-24 Shenting, GB-13
Benshen, P-7 Daling, P-6 Neiguan.
Prescription
Yue Ju Wan 
Gardenia-Ligusticum Pill
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
Ju He Wan 
Citrus Seed Pill
Si Hai Shu Yu Wan 
Fours Seas Soothe Stagnation Pill
 
(specific for
goitre from Qi stagnation and Phlegm).
REBELLIOUS LIVER-QI
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial or epigastric distension, hiccup, sighing, nausea,
vomiting, belching, ‘churning feeling in the stomach’, irritability,
breast distension in women.
Tongue
In light cases the tongue-body colour may not change; in severe
cases the sides will be Red.
Pulse
Wiry. It may be particularly Wiry on the Liver and Stomach
2058
positions.
Acupuncture
LIV-14 Qimen, P-6 Neiguan, GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-3 Taichong,
TB-6 Zhigou, LI-4 Hegu, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-19 Burong.
Prescription
Chai Hu Shu Gan Tang 
Bupleurum Soothing the Liver Decoction
Yi Gan San 
Restrain the Liver Powder
 
.
LIVER-YANG RISING
Clinical manifestations
Headache which may be on the temples, eyes or lateral side of the
head, dizziness, tinnitus, deafness, blurred vision, dry mouth and
throat, insomnia, irritability, a feeling of being worked-up,
propensity to outbursts of anger, stiff neck.
Tongue
The tongue presentation may vary widely depending on the
underlying condition causing Liver-Yang rising. If this derives
from Liver-Blood deficiency the tongue-body colour will be Pale; if
it derives from Liver-Yin deficiency the tongue-body colour will be
slightly Red on the sides and without coating. In some cases, Liver-
Yang rising may develop from rebellious Liver-Qi; in this case the
tongue-body colour may be normal or slightly red on the sides.
Pulse
Wiry. However, if there is a background of Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin
deficiency, the pulse may be Wiry only on one side, or it may also
be Wiry but Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, TB-5 Waiguan, P-6 Neiguan, LI-4 Hegu, GB-43
Xiaxi, GB-38 Yangfu, BL-2 Zanzhu, Taiyang extra point, GB-20
Fengchi, GB-9 Tianchong, GB-8 Shuaigu, GB-6 Xuanli. In cases of
2059
Liver-Blood or Liver-Yin deficiency: SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-3 Taixi, LIV-
8 Ququan, ST-36 Zusanli.
Prescription
Tian Ma Gou Teng Yin 
Gastrodia-Uncaria Decoction
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
 
.
LIVER-BLOOD STASIS
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial pain, abdominal pain, vomiting of blood, epistaxis,
painful periods, irregular periods, dark 
and clotted menstrual
blood, infertility, masses in the abdomen, purple nails, purple lips,
purple or dark complexion, dry skin (in severe cases), purple
petechiae.
Tongue
Purple especially, or only, on the sides. In severe cases, there will
be purple spots on the sides.
Pulse
Wiry or Firm.
Acupuncture
GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-3 Taichong, BL-18 Ganshu, BL-17 Geshu,
SP-10 Xuehai, Ren-6 Qihai, SP-4 Gongsun and P-6 Neiguan
(opening points of the Penetrating Vessel), ST-29 Guilai, KI-14
Siman, LIV-5 Ligou, LIV-6 Zhongdu.
Prescription
Ge Xia Zhu Yu Tang 
Eliminating Stasis below the Diaphragm
Decoction
Shi Xiao San 
Breaking into a Smile Powder
Yan Hu Suo Tang 
Corydalis Decoction
 
.
2060
LIVER-FIRE BLAZING UPWARDS
Clinical manifestations
Irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, tinnitus/deafness
(with sudden onset), temporal headache, dizziness, red face and
eyes, thirst, bitter taste, dream-disturbed sleep, constipation with
dry stools, dark-yellow urine, epistaxis, haematemesis,
haemoptysis.
Tongue
Red with redder sides and dry yellow coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-2 Xingjian, LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, Taiyang extra point,
GB-13 Benshen, LI-11 Quchi, GB-1 Tongziliao, GB-9 Tianchong, GB-
8 Shuaigu, GB-6 Xuanli, Du-24 Shenting, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-1
Dadun.
Prescription
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
Dang Gui Long Hui Tang 
Angelica-Gentiana-Aloe Decoction
 
.
DAMP-HEAT
Damp-Heat In The Liver
Clinical manifestations
Fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body,
yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, vulvar eczema or sores,
mid-cycle bleeding/pain, pain, redness and swelling of the
scrotum, genital, papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching,
urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine.
2061
Tongue
Red body with redder sides, sticky-yellow coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid.
Prescription
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Liver And Gall-Bladder
Clinical manifestations
Fullness of the hypochondrium, abdomen or hypogastrium, bitter
taste, poor appetite, nausea, a feeling of heaviness of the body,
yellow vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, vulvar eczema or sores,
mid-cycle bleeding/pain, pain, redness and swelling of the
scrotum, genital, papular or vesicular skin rashes and itching,
urinary difficulty, burning on urination, dark urine, hypochondrial
pain, fever, yellow complexion and eyes, vomiting.
Tongue
Red body with redder sides, unilateral or bilateral sticky yellow
coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-14 Qimen, GB-24 Riyue, GB-34 Yanglingquan, BL-18 Ganshu,
BL-19 Danshu, Du-9 Zhiyang, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-9 Yinlingquan,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-3 Taibai, LI-11 Quchi, LIV-2 Xingjian, LIV-3
Taichong.
Prescription
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
 
.
2062
LIVER-WIND
Extreme Heat Generating Wind
Clinical manifestations
High temperature, convulsions, rigidity of the neck, tremor of the
limbs, opisthotonos, in severe cases coma.
Tongue
Deep-Red, Stiff, dry yellow coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-2 Xingjian, Shixuan extra points, SI-3 Houxi,
Du-20 Baihui, Du-16 Fengfu, GB-20 Fengchi, Du-8 Jinsuo, Du-14
Dazhui.
Prescription
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
 
.
Liver-Yang Rising Generating Wind
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Yin deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Tremor, facial tic, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
hypertension, dry throat, dry eyes, blurred vision,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, poor memory.
Tongue
Normal-coloured without coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Fine.
2063
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, LI-4 Hegu, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-19
Houding, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-8 Ququan, KI-3 Taixi.
Prescription
Da Ding Feng Zhu 
Big Stopping Wind Pearl
 
(for febrile-disease Heat
injuring Yin)
San Jia Fu Mai Tang 
Three Carapaces Restoring the Pulse Decoction
 
.
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver- and Kidney-Yin
deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Tremor, facial tic, severe dizziness, tinnitus, headache,
hypertension, dry throat, dry eyes, blurred vision,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, poor memory, backache, scanty
urination, night sweating.
Tongue
Normal coloured without coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, LI-4 Hegu, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-19
Houding, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-8 Ququan, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai,
Ren-4 Guanyuan.
Prescription
Zhen Gan Xi Feng Tang 
Pacifying the Liver and Subduing Wind
Decoction
Jian Ling Tang 
Constructing Roof Tiles Decoction
 
.
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Blood deficiency
Clinical manifestations
2064
Tremor, dizziness, tinnitus, headache, hypertension, dry throat,
blurred vision, numbness/tingling of the limbs, poor memory,
insomnia.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Wiry-Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, LI-4 Hegu, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-19
Houding, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-8 Ququan, KI-3 Taixi, BL-17 Geshu,
Ren-4 Guanyuan.
Prescription
E Jiao Ji Zi Huang Tang 
Gelatinum Corii Asini-Egg Yolk Decoction
 
.
Liver-Fire Generating Wind
Clinical manifestations
Tremor, irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger,
tinnitus/deafness (with sudden onset), temporal headache,
dizziness, red face and eyes, thirst, bitter taste, dream-disturbed
sleep, constipation with dry stools, dark-yellow urine, epistaxis,
haematemesis, haemoptysis.
Tongue
Red with redder sides and dry yellow coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-2 Xingjian, LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, Taiyang extra point,
GB-13 Benshen, LI-11 Quchi, GB-1 Tongziliao, GB-9 Tianchong, GB-
8 Shuaigu, GB-6 Xuanli, Du-24 Shenting, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-1
2065
Dadun, Du-8 Jinsuo.
Prescription
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
 
plus
Long Dan Cao 
Radix Gentianae scabrae
 
.
Liver-Blood Deficiency Giving Rise To Wind
Clinical manifestations
Fine tremor, facial tic, dizziness, blurred vision, numbness/tingling
of the limbs, poor memory, insomnia, scanty periods.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Wiry-Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, LI-4 Hegu, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-19
Houding, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-8 Ququan, KI-3 Taixi, BL-17 Geshu,
Ren-4 Guanyuan.
Prescription
E Jiao Ji Zi Huang Tang 
Gelatinum Corii Asini-Egg Yolk Decoction
 
.
Liver-Wind Harbouring Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Headache, dizziness, blurred vision, a feeling of heaviness and
muzziness (fuzziness) of the head, occipital stiffness, tinnitus,
nausea, cough with profuse sputum, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep.
Tongue
Stiff, Swollen with sticky coating.
2066
Pulse
Wiry-Slippery.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, ST-40 Fenglong, LI-4 Hegu, GB-20 Fengchi, ST-8
Touwei, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Ban Xia Bai Zhu Tian Ma Tang 
Pinellia-Atractylodes-Gastrodia
Decoction
 
.
LIVER-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
PATTERNS
Liver-Blood Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred
vision, ‘floaters’ in the eyes, diminished night vision, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion without
lustre, pale lips, muscular weakness, cramps, withered and brittle
nails, dry hair and skin, depression, a feeling of aimlessness.
Tongue
Pale body especially on the sides which, in extreme cases, can
assume an orange colour, and Dry.
Pulse
Choppy or Fine.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-4 Guanyuan,
BL-18 Ganshu, BL-20 Pishu, BL-23 Shenshu, BL-17 Geshu, Yuyao
extra point.
2067
Prescription
Bu Gan Tang 
Tonifying the Liver Decoction
 
.
Liver-Blood Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Mental depression, dizziness, blurred vision, tingling of the limbs,
brittle nails, sputum in the throat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, a feeling of muzziness (fuzziness) of the head, irregular
periods, late periods.
Tongue
Pale with a sticky coating.
Pulse
Choppy on the left, Slippery on the right.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-4 Guanyuan, ST-
40 Fenglong, SP-9 Yinlingquan.
Prescription
Ba Zhen Tang 
Eight Precious Decoction
 
plus Er Chen Tang 
Two Old
Decoction
 
.
STAGNATION OF COLD IN THE LIVER
CHANNEL
Clinical manifestations
Fullness and distension of the hypogastrium with pain, which
refers downwards to the scrotum and testis and upwards to the
hypochondrium, alleviation of the pain by warmth, straining of the
testis or contraction of the scrotum, vertical headache, a feeling of
cold, cold hands and feet, vomiting of clear watery fluid or dry
vomiting. In women there can be shrinking of the vagina.
2068
Tongue
Pale and wet with a white coating.
Pulse
Deep-Wiry-Slow.
Acupuncture
Ren-3 Zhongji, LIV-5 Ligou, LIV-1 Dadun, LIV-3 Taichong. Moxa is
applicable.
Prescription
Nuan Gan Jian 
Warming the Liver Decoction
 
.
LIVER-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Liver-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred
vision, ‘floaters’ in the eyes, dry eyes, diminished night vision,
scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, dull-pale complexion
without lustre but with 
red cheekbones, muscular weakness,
cramps, withered and brittle nails, very dry hair and skin,
depression, a feeling of aimlessness.
Tongue
Normal coloured without coating or with rootless coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-
3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, Yuyao extra point.
Prescription
2069
Yi Guan Jian 
One Linking Decoction
 
.
Liver-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, insomnia, blurred
vision, ‘floaters’ in the eyes, dry eyes, diminished night vision,
scanty menstruation, or heavy menstrual bleeding (if Empty-Heat
is severe), red cheekbones, muscular weakness, cramps, withered
and brittle nails, very dry hair and skin, depression, a feeling of
aimlessness, anxiety, a feeling of heat in the evening, night
sweating, five-palm heat, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips.
Tongue
Red without coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty and slightly Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-
3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, Yuyao extra point, LIV-2 Xingjian, LI-11
Quchi.
Prescription
Yi Guan Jian 
One Linking Decoction
 
plus Zhi Mu 
Radix
Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
and Mu Dan Pi 
Cortex Moutan radicis
Qing Hao Bie Jia Tang 
Artemisia Annua-Carapax Amydae
Decoction
Qing Gu San 
Clearing the Bones Powder
 
.
LIVER-QI DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, blurred vision, floaters, nervousness, timidity, tendency
to be easily startled, lack of courage and initiative, indecision,
2070
sighing, restless dreams, depression, irritability, hypochondrial
distension, irregular periods.
Tongue
Pale or normal.
Pulse
Weak.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, GB-40 Qiuxu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-4
Guanyuan, BL-18 Ganshu.
Prescription
Empirical prescription by Dr Chen Jia Xu.
 
1
LIVER PHLEGM-FIRE
Clinical manifestations
Irritability, propensity to outbursts of anger, tinnitus/deafness
(with sudden onset), temporal headache, dizziness, red face and
eyes, thirst, bitter taste, dream-disturbed sleep, constipation with
dry stools, dark-yellow urine, epistaxis, haematemesis,
haemoptysis, a feeling of oppression of the chest, rattling sound in
the throat, a feeling of muzziness (fuzziness) of the head,
expectoration of sputum, hypertension.
Tongue
Red with redder sides, Swollen and with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
Wiry-Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-2 Xingjian, LIV-3 Taichong, GB-20 Fengchi, Taiyang extra point,
GB-13 Benshen, LI-11 Quchi, GB-1 Tongziliao, GB-9 Tianchong, GB-
2071
8 Shuaigu, GB-6 Xuanli, Du-24 Shenting, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-1
Dadun, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 Fenglong, SP-9 Yinlingquan, LI-4
Hegu.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
 
.
LIVER-YANG DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Tendency to worry, fearfulness, moroseness, depression, floaters,
blurred vision, a feeling of cold, hypochondrial pain and
distension, cold legs, numbness of the head and body, tingling of
the limbs, greenish complexion, pale and withered nails,
contraction of 
the tendons, inability to grasp, lack of libido,
impotence, cold penis, damp scrotum, nocturnal emissions
without dreams, contraction of the vagina, a feeling of cold and
pain in the abdomen in women, late periods, trickling of periods, a
feeling of cold in the waist, infertility.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Deep-Fine or Wiry-Slow but Weak on the left Middle position.
Acupuncture
LIV-8 Ququan, LIV-3 Taichong, BL-18 Ganshu, HE-7 Shenmen, TB-3
Zhongzhu, Du-20 Baihui. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Long Chi Qing Hun Tang 
Dens Draconis Clearing the Ethereal Soul
Decoction
Wen Yang Bu Gan Jian 
Warming Yang and Tonifying the Liver
Decoction
 
plus Ren Shen 
Radix Ginseng
 
, Huang Qi 
Radix Astragali
2072
membranacei
 
, Chai Hu 
Radix Bupleuri
 
, Sheng Ma 
Rhizoma
Cimicifugae
 
.
COMBINED PATTERNS
The Liver combined patterns are:
 
• 
 
rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Spleen
• 
 
rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach
• 
 
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency (see 
Chapter 95
 
,
‘Kidneys’ under combined patterns)
• 
 
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
(see 
Chapter 95
 
, ‘Kidneys’ under combined patterns)
• 
 
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency.
Rebellious Liver-Qi Invading The Spleen
Clinical manifestations
Irritability, abdominal distension and pain, alternation of
constipation and diarrhoea, stools sometimes dry and bitty (small
pieces) and sometimes loose, flatulence, tiredness.
Tongue
Normal coloured or slightly Red on the sides.
Pulse
Wiry on the left and Weak on the right.
Acupuncture
LIV-13 Zhangmen, LIV-14 Qimen, LIV-3 Taichong, GB-34
Yanglingquan, Ren-6 Qihai, ST-25 Tianshu, SP-15 Daheng, Ren-12
Zhongwan, TB-6 Zhigou, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, P-
6Neiguan.
2073
Prescription
Xiao Yao San 
Free and Easy Wanderer Powder
 
.
Rebellious Liver-Qi Invading The Stomach
Clinical manifestations
Irritability, epigastric and hypochondrial distension and pain, a
feeling of oppression in the epigastrium, sour regurgitation,
hiccup, belching, nausea, vomiting, sighing, weak limbs.
Tongue
Normal coloured or slightly Red on the sides.
Pulse
Wiry on the left and Weak on the right or Wiry on both Middle
positions.
Acupuncture
LIV-14 Qimen, GB-34 Yanglingquan, Ren-13 Shangwan, Ren-10
Xiawan, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-19 Burong, ST-36 Zusanli, ST-34
Liangqiu, BL-21 Weishu.
Prescription
Si Mo Tang 
Four Milled-Herb Decoction
Xuan Fu Dai Zhe Tang 
Inula-Haematite Decoction
Ju Pi Zhu Ru Tang 
Citrus-Bambusa Decoction
Ding Xiang Shi Di Tang 
Caryophyllum-Diospyros Decoction
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
 
plus Zuo Jin
Wan 
Left Metal Pill
 
.
Liver-Fire Insulting The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Breathlessness, asthma, a feeling of fullness and distension of the
chest and hypochondrium, cough with a yellow or blood-tinged
sputum, headache, dizziness, red face, thirst, bitter taste,
bloodshot eyes, scanty dark urine, constipation.
2074
Tongue
Red with redder sides and dry yellow coating.
Pulse
Wiry.
Acupuncture
LIV-2 Xingjian, LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-14 Qimen, Ren-17 Shanzhong,
Ren-22 Tiantu, P-6 Neiguan, LU-7 Lieque, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
 
plus
Su Zi 
Fructus Perillae frutescentis
 
, Sang Bai Pi 
Cortex Mori albae
radicis
 
and Zhu Ru 
Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis
 
.
Liver- And Heart-Blood Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, dizziness, insomnia, dream-disturbed sleep, poor
memory, anxiety, tendency to be easily startled, dull-pale
complexion, pale lips, blurred vision, ‘floaters’ in the eyes,
diminished night vision, numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty
periods or amenorrhoea, cramps, muscular weakness, dry hair and
skin, depression, a feeling of aimlessness, withered and brittle
nails.
Tongue
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
Choppy or Fine, especially on the left.
Acupuncture
HE-7 Shenmen, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-14 Juque, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-
15 Jiuwei, BL-17 Geshu, BL-18 Ganshu, BL-20 Pishu, LIV-8 Ququan,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-36 Zusanli.
2075
Prescription
Gui Pi Tang 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
Sheng Yu Tang 
Sage Healing Decoction
Bu Gan Tang 
Tonifying the Liver Decoction
Dang Gui Ji Xue Teng Tang 
Angelica-Ji Xue Teng Decoction
 
.
NOTES
1. 
Chen Jia Xu, Discussion on the syndrome of Liver-Qi
deficiency, in Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
), Beijing 5, 1994, p. 264–267.
2076
CHAPTER 94
 
LUNGS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LUNG-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Lung-Qi deficiency
Lung-Qi deficiency with Phlegm
LUNG-YANG DEFICIENCY
LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Lung-Yin deficiency
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Lung-Yin deficiency with Phlegm
LUNG-QI AND LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY
LUNG-DRYNESS
INVASION OF LUNGS BY WIND
Invasion of Lungs by Wind-Cold
Invasion of Lungs by Wind-Heat
Invasion of Lungs by Wind-Dryness
Invasion of Lungs by Wind-Water
LUNG-HEAT
PHLEGM PATTERNS
2077
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
Phlegm-Dryness in the Lungs
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs
LUNG-QI STAGNATION
LUNG-QI COLLAPSE
COMBINED PATTERNS
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency
LUNG-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Lung-Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Slight shortness of breath, slight cough, weak voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, dislike of speaking, bright-white complexion,
tendency to catch colds, tiredness, dislike of cold.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Empty, especially on the right Front position.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-13 Feishu, Du-12
Shenzhu, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan.
Prescription
Ren Shen Bu Fei Tang 
Ginseng Tonifying the Lungs Decoction
 
.
2078
Lung-Qi Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Chronic cough which is worse on exertion, scanty phlegm that is
difficult to expectorate or dilute watery phlegm, spontaneous
sweating, a feeling of cold, shortness of breath, a feeling of
oppression of the chest, weak voice.
Tongue
Pale and slightly Swollen in the front.
Pulse
Empty on the right Front position and slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 Fenglong,
Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Bu Fei Tang 
Tonifying the Lungs Decoction
 
plus Er Chen Tang 
Two
Old Decoction
 
.
LUNG-YANG DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Slight shortness of breath, slight cough with profuse watery
sputum, weak voice, spontaneous daytime sweating, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, a feeling of cold, cold hands, a feeling of
cold of the upper back, absence of thirst.
Tongue
Pale and slightly wet.
Pulse
Weak, especially on the right Front position.
2079
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-13 Feishu, Du-12
Shenzhu, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan. Moxa must be used.
Prescription
Sheng Mai San 
Generating the Pulse Powder
 
combined with Gan Cao
Gan Jiang Tang 
Glycyrrhiza-Zingiber Decoction
 
plus Huang Qi 
Radix
Astragali membranacei
 
.
LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Lung-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Cough which is dry or with scanty sticky sputum, weak/hoarse
voice, dry mouth and throat, tickly throat, tiredness, dislike of
speaking, thin body or thin chest, night sweating.
Tongue
Normal coloured, dry without coating (or with rootless coating) in
the front part.
Pulse
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-43 Gaohuangshu, BL-13
Feishu, Du-12 Shenzhu, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-6 Zhaohai, Ren-12
Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Bai He Gu Jin Tang 
Lilium Consolidating Metal Decoction
 
.
Lung-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
2080
Dry cough or with scanty sticky sputum which could be blood
tinged, dry mouth and throat at night, weak/hoarse voice, tickly
throat, night sweating, tiredness, malar flush, dislike of speaking,
a feeling of heat or a low-grade fever in the evening, five-palm
heat, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, insomnia, anxiety,
thin body, thin chest.
Tongue
Red without coating.
Pulse
Floating-Empty and Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-43 Gaohuangshu, BL-13
Feishu, Du-12 Shenzhu, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-6 Zhaohai, Ren-12
Zhongwan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LU-10 Yuji, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Yang Yin Qing Fei Tang 
Nourishing Yin and Clearing the Lungs
Decoction
 
.
Lung-Yin Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Bouts of dry cough followed by expectoration of scanty sputum, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, night sweating, a feeling of heat
in the afternoon, dry throat.
Tongue
Peeled in the front, Swollen, sticky coating in the centre.
Pulse
Weak on the right Front position and slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
2081
ST-40 Fenglong, BL-43 Gaohuangshu.
Prescription
Bai He Gu Jin Tang 
Lilium Consolidating Metal Decoction
 
plus Er
Chen Tang 
Two Old Decoction
 
.
LUNG-QI AND LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Slight cough, shortness of breath, weak/hoarse voice, spontaneous
daytime sweating, night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night,
tiredness, pale complexion, tendency to catch colds.
Tongue
Pale if Qi deficiency predominates, normal coloured and without
coating if Yin deficiency predominates. The tongue could also be
Pale in general but without coating in the front.
Pulse
Empty if Qi deficiency predominates, Floating-Empty on the right
Front position if Yin deficiency predominates.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-13 Feishu, BL-43
Gaohuangshu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Sheng Mai San 
Generating the Pulse Powder
Mai Men Dong Tang 
Ophipogon Decoction
Zhu Ye Shi Gao Tang 
Lophatherus-Gypsum Decoction
 
if there is
injury of Lung-Yin following a febrile disease and with a pre-
existing Lung-Qi deficiency.
LUNG-DRYNESS
2082
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough, dry skin, dry throat, dry mouth, thirst, hoarse voice.
Tongue
Dry.
Pulse
Empty especially on the right Front position.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-6 Zhaohai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao,
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli.
Prescription
Bai He Gu Jin Tang 
Lilium Consolidating Metal Decoction
Mai Men Dong Tang 
Ophiopogon Decoction
Zeng Ye Tang 
Increasing Fluids Decoction
 
.
INVASION OF LUNGS BY WIND
Invasion Of Lungs By Wind-Cold
Clinical manifestations
Aversion to cold, fever, cough, itchy throat, slight breathlessness,
stuffed or runny nose with clear watery discharge, sneezing,
occipital headache, body aches.
Tongue
Thin white coating.
Pulse
Floating-Tight.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque, BL-12 Fengmen (with cupping), Du-16 Fengfu.
2083
Prescription
Ma Huang Tang 
Ephedra Decoction
 
.
Invasion Of Lungs By Wind-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Aversion to cold, fever, cough, sore throat, stuffed or runny nose
with yellow discharge, headache, body aches, slight sweating,
slight thirst, swollen tonsils.
Tongue
Slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas or on the front part.
Pulse
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, LU-11 Shaoshang, Du-14 Dazhui, BL-12
Fengmen (with cupping), Du-16 Fengfu, GB-20 Fengchi, TB-5
Waiguan.
Prescription
Sang Ju Yin 
Morus-Chrysanthemum Decoction
Yin Qiao San 
Lonicera-Forsythia Powder
 
.
Invasion Of Lungs By Wind-Dryness
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough, aversion to cold, fever, dry throat, tickly throat, dry
nose, discomfort in the chest.
Tongue
Thin dry white coating.
Pulse
Floating.
2084
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque, LI-4 Hegu, TB-5 Waiguan, Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, BL-12 Fengmen (with cupping), BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Sang Xing Tang 
Morus-Prunus Decoction
Qing Zao Jiu Fei Tang 
Clearing Dryness and Rescuing the Lungs
Decoction
 
.
Invasion Of Lungs By Wind-Water
Clinical manifestations
Sudden swelling of eyes and face gradually spreading to the whole
body, bright shiny complexion, scanty and 
pale urination, aversion
to wind, fever, cough, slight breathlessness.
Tongue
Sticky white coating.
Pulse
Floating-Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque, LI-6 Pianli, LI-7 Wenli, LI-4 Hegu, BL-12 Fengmen,
Ren-9 Shuifen, BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Xiao Qing Long Tang 
Small Green Dragon Decoction
 
.
LUNG-HEAT
Clinical manifestations
Cough, slight breathlessness, a feeling of heat, chest ache, flaring
of the nostrils, thirst, red face.
Tongue
2085
Red with yellow coating
Pulse
Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-10 Yuji, LU-7 Lieque, LI-11 Quchi, LU-1 Zhongfu,
BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Qing Bai San 
Clearing White Powder
 
.
PHLEGM PATTERNS
Damp-Phlegm In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Chronic cough coming in bouts with profuse sticky white sputum
which is easy to expectorate, pasty-white complexion, a feeling of
oppression in the chest, shortness of breath, dislike of lying down,
wheezing, nausea.
Tongue
Swollen with a sticky white coating.
Pulse
Slippery
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-7 Lieque, LU-1 Zhongfu, Ren-17 Shanzhong, ST-40
Fenglong, P-6 Neiguan, Ren-22 Tiantu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-9
Shuifen, BL-20 Pishu, BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Er Chen Tang 
Two Old Decoction
 
.
2086
Cold-Phlegm In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Cough with expectoration of watery white sputum, aggravated by
exposure to cold, a feeling of cold, cold hands, phlegm in the
throat, dizziness, a feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of
cold of the chest.
Tongue
Swollen and wet tongue with a sticky white coating.
Pulse
Slippery-Slow.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-17 Shangzhong, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
BL-13 Feishu, BL-20 Pishu. Moxa must be used.
Prescription
She Gan Ma Huang Tang 
Belamcanda-Ephedra Decoction
Ling Gui Zhu Gan Tang 
Poria-Ramulus Cinnamomi-Atractylodes-
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
Ling Gan Wu Wei Jiang Xin Tang 
Poria-Glycyrrhiza-Schisandra-
Zingiberis-Asarum Decoction
San Zi Yang Qin Tang 
Three-Seed Nourishing the Ancestors
Decoction
 
.
Phlegm-Heat In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Barking cough with profuse sticky yellow or green sputum,
shortness of breath, wheezing, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
a feeling of heat, thirst, insomnia, agitation.
Tongue
Red, Swollen with a sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
2087
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-7 Lieque, LU-10 Yuji, LI-11 Quchi, LU-1 Zhongfu,
BL-13 Feishu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 Fenglong.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
Qing Qi Hua Tan Tang 
Clearing Qi and Resolving Phlegm Decoction
.
Phlegm-Dryness In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough but with occasional, difficult expectoration of scanty
sputum, shortness of breath, a feeling of 
oppression of the chest,
dry throat, wheezing, pasty dry complexion.
Tongue
Swollen with a dry sticky coating.
Pulse
Fine-Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6 Zhaohai in combination, Ren-
12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, ST-40 Fenglong, BL-
13 Feishu, Ren-17 Shanzhong.
Prescription
Bei Mu Gua Lou San 
Fritillaria-Trichosanthes Powder
 
.
Phlegm-Fluids In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Cough with expectoration of watery white mucus, breathlessness,
splashing sound in the chest, vomiting of watery, frothy white
2088
sputum, a feeling of cold, cough which may be elicited by a scare.
Tongue
Pale with thick, sticky white coating.
Pulse
Fine-Slippery or Weak-Floating.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-17 Shanzhong, BL-13 Feishu, ST-40
Fenglong, BL-43 Gaohuangshu, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli,
Ren-9 Shuifen, SP-9 Yinlingquan.
Prescription
Ling Gan Wu Wei Jiang Xin Tang 
Poria-Glycyrrhiza-Schisandra-
Zingiberis-Asarum Decoction
San Zi Yang Qin Tang 
Three-Seed Nourishing the Ancestors
Decoction
 
.
LUNG-QI STAGNATION
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling
of oppression or distension of the chest, slight breathlessness,
sighing, sadness, slight anxiety, depression.
Tongue
Slightly Red on the sides in the chest areas.
Pulse
Very slightly Tight on the right Front position.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque, ST-40 Fenglong, Ren-15 Jiuwei, P-6 Neiguan.
Prescription
2089
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang 
Pinella-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
LUNG-QI COLLAPSE
Clinical manifestations
Weak and interrupted breathing, profuse sweating, sweat drops
like pearls, extreme cold feeling, very cold hands, bright-pale
complexion.
Tongue
Pale or Bluish-Purple.
Pulse
Floating-Scattered or Weak-Minute.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, LU-9 Taiyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-4 Guanyuan,
BL-13 Feishu. Moxa must be used; indirect moxibustion with moxa
cones on slices of aconite on Ren-6 is particularly applicable.
Prescription
Sheng Mai San 
Generating the Pulse Powder
 
in higher doses than
normal.
COMBINED PATTERNS
The combined patterns of the Lungs are:
 
• 
 
Lung-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency (see ‘Kidney-
Yang deficiency, Water overflowing’ or ‘Kidneys failing
to receive Qi’ patterns in 
Chapter 95
 
, ‘Kidneys’).
• 
 
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency (see 
Chapter 95
 
,
‘Kidneys’ under combined patterns).
• 
 
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs (see 
Chapter 93
 
, ‘Liver’
under combined patterns).
• 
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency (see 
Chapter 92
 
,
‘Spleen’ under combined patterns).
2090
• 
 
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency.
Lung- And Heart-Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Slight breathlessness, slight cough, weak voice, dislike of
speaking, bright-white complexion, tendency to catch colds,
tiredness, dislike of cold, palpitations, shortness of breath on
exertion, listlessness, depression, spontaneous sweating, sighing.
Tongue
Pale.
Pulse
Empty, especially on both Front positions.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-13 Feishu, Du-12
Shenzhu, ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, HE-5 Tongli, P-6
Neiguan, BL-15 Xinshu, Ren-17 Shanzhong.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
plus Huang Qi 
Radix
Astragali membranacei
Bao Yuan Tang 
Preserving the Source Decoction
Bu Fei Tang 
Tonifying the Lungs Decoction
Sheng Mai San 
Generating the Pulse Powder
 
.
2091
CHAPTER 95
 
KIDNEYS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
KIDNEY-QI DEFICIENCY
KIDNEY-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Kidney-Yang deficiency, Water overflowing
KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Kidney-Yin deficiency
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Kidney-Yin deficiency, Empty-Heat blazing
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Phlegm
KIDNEY-YANG AND KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Kidney-Yang and Kidney-Yin deficiency –
predominance of Kidney-Yin deficiency
Kidney-Yang and Kidney-Yin deficiency –
predominance of Kidney-Yang deficiency
KIDNEY-QI NOT FIRM
KIDNEYS FAILING TO RECEIVE QI
KIDNEY-ESSENCE DEFICIENCY
2092
COMBINED PATTERNS
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat
Kidney and Heart not harmonized (Kidney- and
Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat)
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-
Heat
Kidney- and Spleen-Yang deficiency
KIDNEY-QI DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
Diminished hearing, dizziness, tinnitus, backache, frequent
urination, urination at night, premature ejaculation, heavy periods.
Tongue
 
Slightly Pale.
Pulse
 
Weak on the right Rear position.
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-3
Taixi, KI-7 Fuliu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Qing E Wan 
Young Maiden Pill
 
.
KIDNEY-YANG DEFICIENCY
PATTERNS
Kidney-Yang Deficiency
2093
Clinical manifestations
Lower backache, cold and weak knees, a sensation of cold in the
lower back, a feeling of cold, weak legs, bright-white complexion,
tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear urination, urination at night,
apathy, oedema of the legs, infertility in women, loose stools,
depression, impotence, premature ejaculation, low sperm count,
cold and thin sperm, decreased libido.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-3
Taixi, KI-7 Fuliu, BL-52 Zhishi, Jinggong extra point (0.5 cun lateral
to BL-52 Zhishi). Moxa must be used.
Prescription
You Gui Wan 
Restoring the Right [Kidney] Pill
Jin Gui Shen Qi Wan 
Golden Chest Kidney-Qi Pill
 
.
Kidney-Yang Deficiency, Water Overflowing
Clinical manifestations
Oedema especially of the legs and ankles, a cold feeling in the legs
and back, fullness and distension of the abdomen, soreness of the
lower back, a feeling of cold, scanty clear urination.
 
1. 
 
Water overflowing to the Heart: the above symptoms
plus palpitations, breathlessness, cold hands.
2. 
 
Water overflowing to the Lungs: the above symptoms
plus thin, watery, frothy sputum, cough, asthma and
breathlessness on exertion.
Tongue
 
Pale, Swollen and wet with a white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Slow.
Acupuncture
2094
Du-4 Mingmen, BL-23 Shenshu, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, BL-20 Pishu,
Ren-9 Shuifen, ST-28 Shuidao, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao,
KI-7 Fuliu.
 
1. 
 
For Water overflowing to the Heart: Du-14 Dazhui
(moxa), BL-15 Xinshu.
2. 
 
For Water overflowing to the Lungs: LU-7 Lieque, BL-
13 Feishu, Du-12 Shenzhu.
Prescription
Jin Gui Shen Qi Wan 
Golden Chest Kidney-Qi Pill
 
plus Wu Ling San
Five ‘Ling’ Powder
 
.
KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Kidney-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory, hardness of hearing,
night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
ache in bones, nocturnal emissions, constipation, scanty dark
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude,
depression, slight anxiety.
Tongue
 
Normal-coloured without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, KI-10 Yingu, KI-9
Zhubin, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-7 Yinjiao, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6
Zhaohai in combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel).
Prescription
Zuo Gui Wan 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
Liu Wei Di Huang Wan 
Six-Ingredient Rehmannia Pill
 
.
2095
Kidney-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory, hardness of hearing,
night sweating, dry mouth at night, five-palm heat, a feeling of
heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot flushes, thirst
with a desire to drink in small sips, lower backache, ache in the
bones, nocturnal emissions with dreams, constipation, scanty dark
urine, infertility, premature ejaculation, tiredness, depression,
anxiety, insomnia, excessive menstrual bleeding.
Tongue
 
Red without coating; in severe cases also cracked.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and slightly Rapid.
Acupuncture
Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, KI-10 Yingu, KI-9
Zhubin, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-7 Yinjiao, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6
Zhaohai in combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel),
KI-2 Rangu, HE-6 Yinxi.
Prescription
Zhi Bo Di Huang Wan 
Anemarrhena-Phellodendron-Rehmannia Pill
Da Bu Yin Wan 
Great Tonifying Yin Pill
Er Zhi Wan 
Two Solstices Pill
 
.
Kidney-Yin Deficiency, Empty-Heat Blazing
Clinical manifestations
Malar flush, mental restlessness, night sweating, low-grade fever,
afternoon fever, a feeling of heat in the afternoon/evening,
insomnia, scanty dark urine, blood 
in the urine, dry throat
especially at night, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, nocturnal
emissions with dreams, excessive sexual desire, dry stools.
Tongue
 
Red-Peeled, cracked with a red tip.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and Rapid.
Acupuncture
2096
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, KI-2 Rangu, KI-9 Zhubin, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-10 Yingu, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, HE-5 Tongli, LU-7 Lieque,
LU-10 Yuji, HE-6 Yinxi, Du-24 Shenting, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Liu Wei Di Huang Wan 
Six-Ingredient Rehmannia Pill
 
plus Di Gu Pi
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
and Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
.
Kidney-Yin Deficiency With Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Sputum in the throat, bouts of dry cough followed by
expectoration of scanty sputum, breathlessness, a feeling of
oppression in the chest, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing,
night sweating.
Tongue
 
Red with rootless sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, Ren-4 Guanyuan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-9 Yinlingquan, ST-
40 Fenglong, KI-6 Zhaohai.
Prescription
Zuo Gui Wan 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
 
plus Bei Mu Gua Lou
Tang 
Fritillaria-Trichosanthes Decoction
 
.
KIDNEY-YANG AND KIDNEY-YIN
DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Kidney-Yang And Kidney-Yin Deficiency –
Predominance Of Kidney-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, poor memory, hardness of hearing,
night sweating, dry mouth and throat at night, lower backache,
2097
ache in the bones, nocturnal emissions, infertility, premature
ejaculation, tiredness, lassitude, depression, slight anxiety, cold
feet, abundant pale urine.
Tongue
 
Normal-coloured without coating or with rootless
coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty or Weak on both Kidney positions.
Acupuncture
Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, KI-10 Yingu, KI-9
Zhubin, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-7 Yinjiao, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6
Zhaohai in combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel).
Moderate use of moxa is applicable (e.g. moxa on the needle on KI-
3 Taixi).
Prescription
Zuo Gui Wan 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
 
plus Ba Ji Tian 
Radix
Morindae officinalis
 
.
Kidney-Yang And Kidney-Yin Deficiency –
Predominance Of Kidney-Yang Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Lower backache, cold knees, a sensation of cold in the back, a
feeling of cold in general but also occasionally one of heat in the
face, menopausal hot flushes, night sweating, weak legs, bright-
white complexion, weak knees, impotence, premature ejaculation,
low sperm count, cold and thin sperm, decreased libido, tiredness,
lassitude, abundant clear or scanty clear urination, urination at
night, apathy, oedema of the legs, infertility in women, loose
stools, depression.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-3
Taixi, KI-7 Fuliu, BL-52 Zhishi, Jinggong extra point (0.5 cun lateral
to BL-52 Zhishi). Moxa is applicable, but less than in Kidney-Yang
2098
deficiency.
Prescription
You Gui Wan 
Restoring the Right [Kidney] Pill
 
plus Sheng Di Huang
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
and Tian Men Dong 
Tuber Asparagi
cochinchinensis
 
.
KIDNEY-QI NOT FIRM
Clinical manifestations
Soreness and weakness of the lower back, weak knees, clear
frequent urination, weak-stream urination, abundant urination,
dribbling after urination, incontinence of urine, enuresis,
urination at night, nocturnal emissions without dreams,
premature ejaculation, spermatorrhoea, prolapse of the uterus in
women chronic white vaginal discharge, tiredness, a dragging-
down feeling in the lower abdomen, recurrent miscarriage, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak especially in the Rear positions.
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, KI-3 Taixi, BL-52 Zhishi, Ren-4
Guanyuan, Jinggong extra point, Ren-6 Qihai, Du-20 Baihui, KI-13
Qixue, BL-32 Ciliao. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
You Gui Yin 
Restoring the Right [Kidney] Decoction
 
plus Huang Qi
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
and Qian Shi 
Semen Euryales ferocis
Jin Suo Gu Jing Wan 
Metal Lock Consolidating the Essence Pill
Fu Tu Dan 
Poria-Cuscuta Pill
 
.
KIDNEYS FAILING TO RECEIVE QI
Clinical manifestations
2099
Shortness of breath on exertion, rapid and weak breathing,
difficulty in inhaling, chronic cough asthma, spontaneous
sweating, cold limbs, cold limbs after sweating, swelling of the
face, thin body, mental listlessness, clear urination during asthma
attack, lower backache, dizziness, tinnitus.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Tight.
Acupuncture
KI-7 Fuliu, KI-3 Taixi, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6 Zhaohai in
combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel), ST-36
Zusanli, BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-17
Shanzhong, KI-25 Shencang, Du-12 Shenzhu, BL-13 Feishu, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
You Gui Yin 
Restoring the Right [Kidney] Decoction
 
plus Dong Chong
Xia Cao 
Sclerotium Cordicipitis chinensis
 
and Wu Wei Zi 
Fructus
Schisandrae chinensis
 
.
Shen Ge San 
Ginseng-Gecko Powder
Su Zi Jiang Qi Tang 
Perilla-Seed Subduing Qi Decoction
 
.
KIDNEY-ESSENCE DEFICIENCY
Clinical manifestations
In children: poor bone development, late closure of the
fontanelles, deafness, mental dullness or retardation.
In adults: softening of the bones, weakness of the knees and
legs, poor memory, loose teeth, falling hair or premature greying of
hair, weakness from sexual activity, lower backache, infertility,
sterility, primary amenorrhoea, dizziness, tinnitus, deafness,
blurred vision, absentmindedness, decreased mental sharpness.
Tongue
 
Without coating if this pattern occurs against a
background of Kidney-Yin deficiency; Pale if against a background
of Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty or Leather.
2100
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, Ren-4 Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, BL-23
Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, GB-39 Xuanzhong, Du-20 Baihui, Du-14
Dazhui, BL-15 Xinshu, BL-11 Dashu, Du-17 Naohu, Du-16 Fengfu.
Prescription
Zuo Gui Yin 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Decoction
Zuo Gui Wan 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
 
.
COMBINED PATTERNS
The Kidneys Combined Patterns are:
 
• 
 
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Kidney and Heart not Harmonized
• 
 
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency
• 
 
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
• 
 
Kidney- and Spleen-Yang deficiency.
Kidney- And Liver-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, lower backache, dull
occipital or vertical headache, insomnia, 
numbness/tingling of the
limbs, dry eyes, blurred vision, dry throat, dry hair and skin, brittle
nails, dry vagina, night sweating, dry stools, nocturnal emissions,
scanty menstruation or amenorrhoea, delayed cycle, infertility.
Tongue
 
normal coloured without coating or with rootless
coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, LIV-8 Ququan, Ren-4 Guanyuan, BL-23
Shenshu, KI-13 Qixue, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
2101
Prescription
Zuo Gui Wan 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
Qi Ju Di Huang Wan 
Lycium-Chrysanthemum-Rehmannia Pill
 
.
Kidney- And Liver-Yin Deficiency With
Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, dull occipital or vertical
headache, insomnia, numbness/tingling of the limbs, dry eyes,
blurred vision, lower backache, dry throat at night, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, dry
vagina, night sweating, dry stools, nocturnal emissions, scanty
menstruation or amenorrhoea, delayed cycle, infertility, five-palm
heat, a feeling of heat in the evening, malar flush, menopausal hot
flushes.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and slightly Rapid.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, LIV-8 Ququan, Ren-4 Guanyuan, BL-23
Shenshu, KI-13 Qixue, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-2 Rangu, LI-11 Quchi,
HE-6 Yinxi, LIV-2 Xingjian.
Prescription
Liu Wei Di Huang Wan 
Six-Ingredient Rehmannia Pill
 
plus Di Gu Pi
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
and Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
.
Kidney And Heart Not Harmonized (Kidney-
And Heart-Yin Deficiency With Heart Empty-
Heat)
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, mental restlessness, insomnia, dream-disturbed
sleep, anxiety, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of
hearing, lower backache, nocturnal emissions with dreams, a
2102
feeling of heat in the evening, dry throat at night, thirst with a
desire to drink in small sips, night sweating, five-palm heat, scanty
dark urine, dry stools.
Tongue
 
Red with redder tip without coating, midline Heart crack.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and Rapid or Deep-Weak on both Rear
positions and relatively overflowing on both Front positions.
Acupuncture
HE-7 Shenmen, HE-6 Yinxi, HE-5 Tongli, Yintang extra point, BL-15
Xinshu, Ren-15 Jiuwei, Du-24 Shenting, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai,
KI-10 Yingu, KI-9 Zhubin, Ren-4 Guanyuan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Tian Wang Bu Xin Dan 
Heavenly Emperor Tonifying the Heart Pill
 
.
Kidney- And Lung-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough which is worse in the evening, dry throat and mouth,
thin body, breathlessness on exertion, lower backache, night
sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty
urination.
Tongue
 
Normal coloured without coating or with rootless
coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6 Zhaohai in
combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel), Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-1 Zhongfu, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, BL-43 Gaohuangshu.
Prescription
Ba Xian Chang Shou Wan 
Eight Immortals Longevity Pill
 
.
Kidney- And Lung-Yin Deficiency With
2103
Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough which is worse in the evening, dry throat and mouth at
night, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, thin body,
breathlessness on exertion, lower 
backache, night sweating,
dizziness, tinnitus, hardness of hearing, scanty urination, a feeling
of heat in the evening, five-palm heat, malar flush.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and slightly Rapid.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, LU-7 Lieque and KI-6 Zhaohai in
combination (opening points of the Directing Vessel), Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-1 Zhongfu, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, BL-43 Gaohuangshu, KI-2 Rangu, LU-10 Yuji, LI-11
Quchi.
Prescription
Ba Xian Chang Shou Wan 
Eight Immortals Longevity Pill
 
plus Di Gu
Pi 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
.
Kidney- And Spleen-Yang Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Lower backache, cold and weak knees, a sensation of cold in the
back, a feeling of cold, weak legs, bright-white complexion,
impotence, premature ejaculation, low sperm count, cold and thin
sperm, decreased libido, tiredness, lassitude, abundant clear or
scanty clear urination, urination at night, apathy, oedema of the
legs, infertility in women, loose stools, depression, poor appetite,
slight abdominal distension, a desire to lie down, early-morning
diarrhoea, chronic diarrhoea.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
2104
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-3
Taixi, KI-7 Fuliu, BL-52 Zhishi, Jinggong extra point (0.5 cun lateral
to BL-52 Zhishi), Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-9 Shuifen, ST-36 Zusanli,
SP-3 Taibai, BL-20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-25
Tianshu, BL-25 Dachangshu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Li Zhong Wan 
Regulating the Centre Pill
 
plus Jin Gui Shen Qi Wan
Golden Chest Kidney-Qi Pill
 
.
2105
CHAPTER 96
 
SMALL
INTESTINE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
FULL-HEAT IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
SMALL INTESTINE QI PAIN
SMALL INTESTINE QI TIED
SMALL INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
INFESTATION OF WORMS IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
FULL-HEAT IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
Clinical manifestations
Mental restlessness, insomnia, tongue/mouth ulcers, pain in the
throat, deafness, an uncomfortable feeling and sensation of heat in
the chest, abdominal pain, thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, scanty dark urine, burning pain on urination, blood in
urine.
Tongue
 
Red with redder and swollen tip, yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Overflowing-Rapid, especially in the Front position. If
there are urinary symptoms the pulse would be Wiry on the left
2106
Rear position.
Acupuncture
SI-2 Qiangu, SI-5 Yanggu, HE-5 Tongli, HE-8 Shaofu, ST-39 Xiajuxu.
Prescription
Dao Chi San 
Eliminating Redness Powder
Dao Chi Qing Xin Tang 
Eliminating Redness and Clearing the
Heart Decoction
 
.
SMALL INTESTINE QI PAIN
Clinical manifestations
Lower abdominal twisting pain which may extend to back,
abdominal distension, dislike of pressure on abdomen,
borborygmi, flatulence, abdominal pain relieved by emission of
wind, pain in the testis.
Tongue
 
White coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Wiry, especially on the Rear positions.
Acupuncture
Ren-6 Qihai, GB-34 Yanglingquan, LIV-13 Zhangmen, ST-27 Daju,
ST-29 Guilai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-3 Taichong, ST-39 Xiajuxu.
Prescription
Chai Hu Shu Gan Tang 
Bupleurum Soothing the Liver Decoction
 
.
SMALL INTESTINE QI TIED
Clinical manifestations
Violent abdominal pain, dislike of pressure, abdominal distension,
constipation, vomiting, borborygmi, flatulence.
Tongue
 
Thick white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Wiry.
2107
Acupuncture
ST-39 Xiajuxu, extra point Lanweixue, Ren-6 Qihai, GB-34
Yanglingquan, ST-25 Tianshu, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-3 Taichong.
Prescription
Zhi Shi Dao Zhi Wan 
Citrus Eliminating Stagnation Pill
Tian Tai Wu Yao San 
Top-Quality Lindera Powder
 
.
SMALL INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND
COLD
Clinical manifestations
Dull abdominal pain alleviated by pressure, a desire for hot
drinks, borborygmi, diarrhoea, pale and abundant urination, cold
limbs.
Tongue
 
Pale body, white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Slow.
Acupuncture
Ren-6 Qihai, ST-25 Tianshu, ST-39 Xiajuxu, ST-36 Zusanli, BL-20
Pishu, BL-27 Xiaochangshu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Xiao Jian Zhong Tang 
Small Strengthening the Centre Decoction
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodis Powder
 
.
INFESTATION OF WORMS IN THE
SMALL INTESTINE
Clinical manifestations
Abdominal pain and distension, bad taste in mouth, sallow
complexion.
Roundworms (ascarid)
 
Abdominal pain, vomiting of
2108
roundworms, cold limbs.
Hookworms
 
Desire to eat strange objects such as soil, wax,
uncooked rice or tea leaves.
Pinworms
 
Itchy anus, worse in the evening.
Tapeworms
 
Constant hunger.
Acupuncture
Acupuncture is not applicable in this pattern.
Prescription
Li Zhong An Hui Tang 
Regulating the Centre and Calming
Roundworms Decoction
Lian Mei An Hui Tang 
Picrorhiza-Mume Calming Roundworms
Decoction
Hua Chong Wan 
Dissolving Parasites Pill
Qu Tiao Tang 
Expelling Tapeworms Decoction
 
.
2109
CHAPTER 97
 
STOMACH
CHAPTER CONTENTS
STOMACH-QI DEFICIENCY
STOMACH DEFICIENT AND COLD (STOMACH-YANG
DEFICIENCY)
STOMACH-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
Stomach-Yin deficiency
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
DEFICIENCY OF STOMACH-YIN AND STOMACH-YANG
STOMACH-QI STAGNATION
BLOOD STASIS IN THE STOMACH
STOMACH-HEAT
STOMACH-FIRE
STOMACH PHLEGM-FIRE
STOMACH DAMP-HEAT
COLD INVADING THE STOMACH
STOMACH-QI REBELLING UPWARDS
RETENTION OF FOOD IN THE STOMACH
STOMACH-QI DEFICIENCY
2110
Clinical manifestations
An uncomfortable feeling in the epigastrium, lack of appetite, lack
of sense of taste, loose stools, tiredness especially in the morning,
weak limbs.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Empty, especially on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-21 Weishu, Ren-6 Qihai. Moxa
is applicable.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
.
STOMACH DEFICIENT AND COLD
(STOMACH-YANG DEFICIENCY)
Clinical manifestations
Discomfort or a dull pain in the epigastrium, better after eating
and with pressure or massage, lack of appetite, preference for
warm drinks and foods, vomiting of clear fluid, absence of thirst,
cold and weak limbs, tiredness, pale complexion.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Slow, especially on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-20 Pishu, BL-21 Weishu, Ren-6
Qihai. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Huang Qi Jian Zhong Tang 
Astragalus Strengthening the Centre
Decoction
Xiao Jian Zhong Tang 
Small Strengthening the Centre Decoction
 
.
2111
STOMACH-YIN DEFICIENCY
PATTERNS
Stomach-Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
No appetite or slight hunger but no desire to eat, constipation (dry
stools), dull or slightly burning epigastric pain, dry mouth and
throat especially in the afternoon, slight feeling of fullness after
eating.
Tongue
 
Peeled in the centre, or with rootless coating, normal
body colour.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-3 Taibai.
Prescription
Sha Shen Mai Dong Tang 
Glehnia-Opheopogan Decoction
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodis Powder
Yi Wei Tang 
Benefiting the Stomach Decoction
 
.
Stomach-Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dull or burning epigastric pain, a feeling of heat in the afternoon,
constipation (dry stools), dry mouth and throat especially in the
afternoon, thirst with a desire to drink in small sips, feeling of
hunger but no desire to eat, a slight feeling of fullness after eating,
night sweating, five-palm heat, bleeding gums, a feeling of heat in
the evening.
Tongue
 
Red and Peeled in the centre.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty on the right Middle position and slightly
Rapid.
Acupuncture
2112
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-3 Taibai, ST-
44 Neiting, ST-21 Liangmen, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Sha Shen Mai Dong Tang plus Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae
asphodeloidis
 
and Shi Hu 
Herba Dendrobii
 
.
DEFICIENCY OF STOMACH-YIN AND
STOMACH-YANG
Clinical manifestations
Dull or burning epigastric pain, dry throat and mouth, poor
appetite, sour regurgitation, tiredness, sweating, night sweating,
five-palm heat, cold fingers.
Tongue
 
Red in the centre without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty.
This is essentially a Stomach-Yin deficiency which has developed
from a Stomach-Yang deficiency.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-3 Taibai, ST-
21 Liangmen, ST-44 Neiting. Generally no moxa but moxa on the
needle on ST-36 may be used.
Prescription
Si Jun Zi Tang 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
 
or Huang Qi Jian Zhong
Tang 
Astragalus Strengthening the Centre Decoction
 
combined with
Yi Wei Tang 
Benefiting the Stomach Decoction
 
or Sha Shen Mai Dong
Tang 
Glehnia-Ophiopogan Decoction
 
.
STOMACH-QI STAGNATION
Clinical manifestations
Epigastric pain and distension, belching, nausea, vomiting, hiccup,
2113
irritability.
Tongue
 
No particular signs on the tongue except that in severe
cases it may be Red on the sides in the central section.
Pulse
 
Wiry on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-19 Burong, KI-21 Youmen, TB-6
Zhigou, SP-4 Gongsun with P-6 Neiguan (opening points of the
Penetrating Vessel), GB-34 Yanglingquan with Ren-12 Zhongwan,
ST-40 Fenglong.
Prescription
Chen Xiang Jiang San 
Aquilaria Subduing Qi Powder
 
Ban Xia Hou
Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
 
Zuo Jin Wan 
Left Metal Pill
 
.
BLOOD STASIS IN THE STOMACH
Clinical manifestations
Severe, stabbing epigastric pain that may be worse at night, dislike
of pressure, nausea, vomiting, possibly of blood, or of food looking
like coffee grounds.
Tongue
 
Purple.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
Acupuncture
ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-19 Burong, KI-21 Youmen, TB-6
Zhigou, SP-4 Gongsun with P-6 Neiguan (opening points of the
Penetrating Vessel), GB-34 Yanglingquan with Ren-12 Zhongwan,
ST-40 Fenglong, BL-17 Geshu, SP-10 Xuehai, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11
Jianli.
Prescription
Shi Xiao San 
Breaking into a Smile Powder
Dan Shen Yin 
Salvia Decoction
Ge Xia Zhu Yu Tang 
Eliminating Stasis below the Diaphragm
Decoction
2114
Tong You Tang 
Penetrating the Depth Decoction
 
.
STOMACH-HEAT
Clinical manifestations
Burning epigastric pain, thirst, sour regurgitation, nausea,
vomiting soon after eating, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling
of heat.
Tongue
 
Red in the centre with a yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid and slightly Overflowing on the right Middle
position.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
Ren-13 Shangwan, LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli.
Prescription
Bai Hu Tang 
White Tiger Decoction
Yu Nu Jian 
Jade Woman Decoction
Qing Wei San 
Clearing the Stomach Powder
 
.
STOMACH-FIRE
Clinical manifestations
Burning epigastric pain, intense thirst with a desire to drink cold
liquids, mental restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools, dry mouth,
mouth ulcers, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after
eating, excessive hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat.
Tongue
 
Red in the centre with a dry yellow or dark-yellow (or
even black) coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid and slightly Overflowing on the right Middle
position.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
2115
Ren-13 Shangwan, LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli, SP-15
Daheng.
Prescription
Tiao Wei Cheng Qi Tang 
Regulating the Stomach Conducting Qi
Decoction
Qing Wei San 
Clearing the Stomach Powder
Liang Ge San 
Cooling the Diaphragm Powder
 
.
STOMACH PHLEGM-FIRE
Clinical manifestations
Burning epigastric pain, thirst without a desire to drink, mental
restlessness, bleeding gums, dry stools, dry mouth, mouth ulcers,
sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting soon after eating, excessive
hunger, foul breath, a feeling of heat, a feeling of oppression of the
chest and epigastrium, mucus in the stools, insomnia, excessive
dreaming, expectoration of phlegm.
Tongue
 
Red in the centre with a sticky yellow or dark-yellow (or
even black) coating, Stomach crack with a rough, sticky yellow
coating inside it.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid and slightly Overflowing on the right
Middle position.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
Ren-13 Shangwan, LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli, SP-15
Daheng, ST-40 Fenglong, SP-9 Yinlingquan, Ren-9 Shuifen, SP-6
Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
 
.
STOMACH DAMP-HEAT
2116
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of fullness and pain of the epigastrium, a feeling of
heaviness, facial pain, stuffed nose or thick, sticky nasal discharge,
thirst without a desire to drink, nausea, a feeling of heat, dull-
yellow complexion, a sticky taste.
Tongue
 
Red tongue with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, Ren-12 Zhongwan,
Ren-13 Shangwan, LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli, ST-25
Tianshu, ST-40 Fenglong, SP-9 Yinlingquan, Ren-9 Shuifen.
Prescription
Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
COLD INVADING THE STOMACH
Clinical manifestations
Sudden severe pain in the epigastrium, a feeling of cold, cold
limbs, preference for warmth, vomiting of clear fluids (which may
alleviate the pain), nausea, feeling worse after swallowing cold
fluids (which are quickly vomited), preference for warm liquids.
Tongue
 
Thick white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Tight-Slow.
Acupuncture
ST-21 Liangmen, SP-4 Gongsun, Ren-13 Shangwan, ST-34 Liangqiu.
Moxa must be used.
Prescription
Liang Fu Wan 
Alpinia-Cyperus Pill
 
.
STOMACH-QI REBELLING UPWARDS
2117
Clinical manifestations
Nausea, difficulty in swallowing, belching, vomiting, hiccup.
Tongue
 
No changes.
Pulse
 
Tight or Wiry on the right Middle position.
Acupuncture
Ren-13 Shangwan, Ren-10 Xiawan, P-6 Neiguan, SP-4 Gongsun, ST-
21 Liangmen, ST-19 Burong.
Prescription
Ding Xiang Shi Di Tang 
Caryophyllum-Diospyros Decoction
Huo Xiang Zheng Qi San 
Agastaches Upright-Qi Powder
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
RETENTION OF FOOD IN THE
STOMACH
Clinical manifestations
Fullness, pain and distension of the epigastrium which are
relieved by vomiting, nausea, vomiting of sour fluids, foul breath,
sour regurgitation, belching, insomnia, loose stools or
constipation, poor appetite.
Tongue
 
Thick coating (which could be white or yellow).
Pulse
 
Full-Slippery.
Acupuncture
Ren-13 Shangwan, Ren-10 Xiawan, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-44 Neiting,
ST-45 Lidui, SP-4 Gongsun, P-6 Neiguan, ST-40 Fenglong, ST-19
Burong, KI-21 Youmen, Ren-12 Zhongwan.
Prescription
Bao He Wan 
Preserving and Harmonizing Pill
Zhi Shi Dao Zhi Wan 
Citrus Eliminating Stagnation Pill
 
.
2118
CHAPTER 98
 
GALL-BLADDER
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DAMP-HEAT PATTERNS
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder and Liver
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
DAMP-COLD IN THE GALL-BLADDER
GALL-BLADDER HEAT
GALL-BLADDER DEFICIENT
STAGNATION OF THE GALL-BLADDER WITH PHLEGM-HEAT
DAMP-HEAT PATTERNS
Damp-Heat In The Gall-Bladder And Liver
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion, scanty and dark yellow
urine, fever, thirst without a desire to drink, bitter taste, dizziness,
yellow sclera, tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, numbness of the limbs, swelling of the feet, burning on
urination, difficulty in urinating, excessive vaginal discharge, loose
2119
stools or constipation, alternation of hot and cold feeling, a feeling
of heat, genital papular skin rashes and itching, swelling and heat
of the scrotum.
Tongue
 
Thick, sticky yellow coating, either bilateral or only on
one side.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
GB-24 Riyue, LIV-14 Qimen, Ren-12 Zhongwan, GB-34
Yanglingquan, extra point Dannangxue, Du-9 Zhiyang, BL-19
Danshu, BL-20 Pishu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-6 Zhigou, ST-19 Burong, LIV-
3 Taichong, LIV-5 Ligou.
Prescription
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Gall-Bladder
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial pain, fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting,
inability to digest fats, yellow complexion, scanty and dark yellow
urine, fever, thirst without a 
desire to drink, bitter taste, dizziness,
tinnitus, irritability, a feeling of heaviness of the body, numbness
of the limbs, swelling of the feet, loose stools or constipation, an
alternation of hot and cold feeling, yellow sclera, a feeling of heat.
Tongue
 
Thick, sticky yellow coating, either bilateral in two strips
or unilateral.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
GB-24 Riyue, LIV-14 Qimen, Ren-12 Zhongwan, GB-34
Yanglingquan, extra point Dannangxue, Du-9 Zhiyang, BL-19
Danshu, BL-20 Pishu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-6 Zhigou, ST-19 Burong.
Prescription
Yin Chen Hao Tang 
Artemisia Capillaris Decoction
 
.
2120
DAMP-COLD IN THE GALL-BLADDER
Clinical manifestations
Jaundice, dull-yellow eyes and skin, hypochondrial pain, fullness
and distension, nausea, vomiting, inability to digest fats, dull-
yellow sclera, turbid urine, absence of thirst, sticky taste, dull
headache, a feeling of heaviness of the body, a feeling of cold.
Tongue
 
Thick, sticky white coating, either bilateral in two strips
or unilateral.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Wiry-Slow.
Acupuncture
GB-24 Riyue, LIV-14 Qimen, Ren-12 Zhongwan, GB-34
Yanglingquan, extra point Dannangxue, Du-9 Zhiyang, BL-19
Danshu, BL-20 Pishu, TB-6 Zhigou, ST-19 Burong.
Prescription
San Ren Tang 
Three Seeds Decoction
 
plus Yin Chen Hao 
Herba
Artemisiae capillaris
 
.
GALL-BLADDER HEAT
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, tinnitus, bitter taste, dry throat, irritability, red face and
ears, hypochondrial fullness.
Tongue
 
Unilateral or bilateral yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
GB-24 Riyue, GB-34 Yanglingquan, extra point Dannangxue, Du-9
Zhiyang, BL-19 Danshu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-6 Zhigou, ST-19 Burong,
GB-43 Xiaxi.
Prescription
Jin Ling Zi San 
Melia Powder
 
combined with Zuo Jin Wan 
Left
2121
Metal Pill
 
.
GALL-BLADDER DEFICIENT
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, blurred vision, ‘floaters’, nervousness, timidity,
tendency to be easily startled, lack of courage and initiative,
indecision, sighing, waking up early in the morning, restless
dreams.
Tongue
 
Pale or normal.
Pulse
 
Weak.
Acupuncture
GB-40 Qiuxu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
 
. This formula,
originally by Sun Si-Miao, was used for irritability and insomnia
deriving from Cold in the Gall-Bladder after a severe illness. The
original formula omitted Fu Ling and contained Sheng Jiang in a
larger dosage (12 g).
An Shen Ding Zhi Wan 
Calming the Spirit and Settling the Will-
Power Pill
 
.
STAGNATION OF THE GALL-
BLADDER WITH PHLEGM-HEAT
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial distension and pain, dizziness, blurred vision,
irritability, insomnia, palpitations, a feeling of oppression of the
chest and hypochondrium, sighing, slight breathlessness,
excessive dreaming, bitter taste, nausea.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Slippery.
2122
Acupuncture
GB-24 Riyue, GB-34 Yanglingquan, SP-9 Yinglingquan, ST-19
Burong, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 
Fenglong, LU-7 Lieque, TB-6
Zhigou, P-6 Neiguan, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang plus Yin Chen Hao 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
, Mu
Xiang 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
and Xiang Fu 
Rhizoma Cyperi
rotundi
 
.
COMBINED PATTERNS
For combined Liver and Gall-Bladder patterns, see 
Chapter 93
 
,
‘Liver’.
2123
CHAPTER 99
 
LARGE
INTESTINE
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DAMP-HEAT IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
HEAT PATTERNS
Heat in the Large Intestine
Heat obstructing the Large Intestine
COLD PATTERNS
Cold invading the Large Intestine
Large Intestine Cold
LARGE INTESTINE DRYNESS
DAMPNESS IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND DAMP
COLLAPSE OF LARGE INTESTINE
2124
DAMP-HEAT IN THE LARGE
INTESTINE
Clinical manifestations
Abdominal pain that is not relieved by a bowel movement,
diarrhoea, mucus and blood in the stools, offensive odour of the
stools, burning in the anus, scanty dark urine, fever, sweating
which does not decrease the fever, a feeling of heat, thirst without
a desire to drink, a feeling of heaviness of the body and limbs.
Tongue
 
Red with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, ST-25
Tianshu, ST-27 Daju, Ren-6 Qihai, BL-25 Dachangshu, LI-11 Quchi,
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-37 Shangjuxu, BL-20 Pishu.
Prescription
Ge Gen Qin Lian Tang 
Pueraria-Scutellaria-Coptis Decoction
Bai Tou Weng Tang 
Pulsatilla Decoction
Shao Yao Tang 
Paeonia Decoction
 
.
HEAT PATTERNS
Heat In The Large Intestine
Clinical manifestations
Constipation with dry stools, a burning sensation in the mouth,
dry tongue, burning and swelling in the anus, scanty dark urine.
Tongue
 
Thick yellow (or brown or black) dry coating.
Pulse
 
Full-Rapid.
Acupuncture
ST-25 Tianshu, BL-25 Dachangshu, LI-11 Quchi, ST-37 Shangjuxu,
ST-44 Neiting, LI-2 Erjian, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-6 Zhaohai.
2125
Prescription
Ma Zi Ren Wan 
Cannabis Pill
 
.
Heat Obstructing The Large Intestine
Clinical manifestations
Constipation, burning in the anus, abdominal distension and pain
which is worse with pressure, high fever or tidal fever (fever that
rises in the afternoon), sweating especially on limbs, vomiting,
thirst, delirium.
Tongue
 
Thick, dry yellow (or brown-black) coating, Red body.
Pulse
 
Deep-Full.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, SP-15 Daheng, TB-6 Zhigou, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, LI-2 Erjian, ST-44 Neiting, ST-25 Tianshu, BL-25
Dachangshu.
Prescription
Tiao Wei Cheng Qi Tang 
Regulating the Stomach Conducting Qi
Decoction
 
.
COLD PATTERNS
Cold Invading The Large Intestine
Clinical manifestations
Sudden abdominal pain, diarrhoea with pain, a feeling of cold, a
cold sensation in the abdomen.
Tongue
 
Thick white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Wiry.
Acupuncture
ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-25 Tianshu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao,
LIV-3 Taichong, ST-27 Daju. Moxa is applicable.
2126
Prescription
Liang Fu Wan 
Alpinia Cyperus Pill
 
plus Zheng Qi Tian Xiang San
Upright Qi Heavenly Fragrance Powder
 
.
Large Intestine Cold
Clinical manifestations
Loose stools like duck droppings, dull abdominal pain,
borborygmi, pale urine, cold limbs.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
ST-25 Tianshu, Ren-6 Qihai, ST-36 Zusanli, ST-37 Shangjuxu, BL-25
Dachangshu, BL-20 Pishu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Liang Fu Wan 
Alpinia Cyperus Pill
 
.
LARGE INTESTINE DRYNESS
Clinical manifestations
Dry stools which are difficult to discharge, dry mouth and throat,
thin body, foul breath, dizziness.
Tongue
 
Dry, either Pale or Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-6 Zhaohai, Ren-4 Guanyuan, ST-
25 Tianshu.
Prescription
Zeng Ye Tang 
Increasing Fluids Decoction
Qing Zao Run Chang Tang 
Clearing Dryness and Moistening the
Intestines Decoction
2127
Wu Ren Wan 
Five-Seeds Pill
Tian Di Jian 
Heaven and Earth Decoction
Si Wu Ma Ren Wan 
Four-Substance Cannabis Pill
Ma Zi Ren Wan 
Cannabis Pill
 
.
DAMPNESS IN THE LARGE
INTESTINE
Clinical manifestations
Abdominal distension and fullness, difficulty in urination, scanty
urination, loose stools, borbor-ygmi, sticky taste, nausea, vomiting,
mucus in the stools.
Tongue
 
Sticky white coating.
Pulse
 
Soggy on the right Rear position.
Acupuncture
ST-25 Tianshu, BL-25 Dachangshu, ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-27 Daju,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-9 Yinlingquan, Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-22
Sanjiaoshu.
Prescription
Wei Ling Tang 
Stomach ‘Ling’ Decoction
 
.
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND
COLD
Clinical manifestations
Chronic dull abdominal pain that is alleviated by pressure,
application of heat and ingestion of warm liquids, borborygmi,
loose stools, in some cases constipation, cold limbs especially the
legs, pale stools.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak especially on both Rear positions.
2128
Acupuncture
ST-25 Tianshu, BL-25 Dachangshu, ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-27 Daju,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-6 Qihai, ST-36 Zusanli. Moxa should be used.
Prescription
Fu Zi Li Zhong Wan 
Aconitum Regulating the Centre Pill
Zhen Ren Yang Zang Tang 
True Man Nourishing the Organs
Decoction
 
.
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND
DAMP
Clinical manifestations
Dull abdominal pain that is alleviated by pressure or application
of heat, and aggravated by exposure to cold or ingestion of cold
foods, loose stools, possi-bly mucus in the stools, a feeling of
heaviness, incontinence of the stools, abdominal fullness,
tiredness.
Tongue
 
Pale with a sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Weak and slightly Slippery.
Acupuncture
ST-25 Tianshu, BL-25 Dachangshu, ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-27 Daju,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao, SP-9 Yinlingquan, Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-22
Sanjiaoshu, Ren-6 Qihai, ST-36 Zusanli.
Prescription
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodes Powder
 
plus
Xiang Fu 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
.
COLLAPSE OF LARGE INTESTINE
Clinical manifestations
Chronic diarrhoea, prolapse ani, haemorrhoids, tiredness after
2129
bowel movements, cold limbs, lack of appetite, mental exhaustion,
a desire to drink warm liquids, a desire to have the abdomen
massaged.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Fine-Weak.
Acupuncture
Ren-6 Qihai, ST-25 Tianshu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-3 Taibai, BL-20 Pishu,
BL-21 Weishu, Du-20 Baihui.
Prescription
Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre Benefiting Qi Decoction
 
.
2130
CHAPTER
100
 
BLADDER
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DAMP-HEAT IN THE BLADDER
DAMP-COLD IN THE BLADDER
BLADDER DEFICIENT AND COLD
For combined Kidney and Bladder patterns, please refer to
Chapter 95
 
, ‘Kidney’.
DAMP-HEAT IN THE BLADDER
Clinical manifestations
Frequent and urgent urination, burning on urination, difficult
urination (stopping in the middle of flow), dark-yellow/turbid
urine, blood in the urine, fever, thirst with no desire to drink,
hypogastric fullness and pain, a feeling of heat.
Tongue
 
Thick, sticky yellow coating on the root with red spots.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid and slightly Wiry on the left Rear position.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, BL-28
Pangguangshu, Ren-3 Zhongji, BL-63 Jinmen, BL-66 Tonggu, ST-28
2131
Shuidao.
Prescription
Ba Zheng Tang 
Eight Upright Powder
 
.
DAMP-COLD IN THE BLADDER
Clinical manifestations
Frequent and urgent urination, difficult urination (stopping in
mid-stream), a feeling of heaviness in hypogastrium and urethra,
pale and turbid urine.
Tongue
 
White sticky coating on root.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Slow and slightly Wiry on left Rear position.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, Ren-3
Zhongji, ST-28 Shuidao, Ren-9 Shuifen, BL-28 Pangguangshu. Moxa
is applicable.
Prescription
Ba Zheng San 
Eight Upright Powder
Shi Wei San 
Pyrrosia Powder
 
.
BLADDER DEFICIENT AND COLD
Clinical manifestations
Frequent, abundant pale urination, incontinence, enuresis, lower
backache, dizziness, nocturia, white urethral discharge.
Tongue
 
Pale, wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Du-4 Mingmen, BL-28 Pangguangshu, Ren-4
Guanyuan, Ren-3 Zhongji, Du-20 Baihui.
2132
Prescription
Suo Quan Wan 
Contracting the Spring Pill
Sang Piao Xiao San 
Ootheca Mantidis Pill
Tu Si Zi Wan 
Cuscuta Pill
 
.
2133
SECTION 2
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING
TO QI, BLOOD
AND BODY
FLUIDS
2134
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
QI, BLOOD AND
BODY FLUIDS
Section contents
101. 
 
Identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood, Yang and Yin
102. 
 
Identification of patterns according to Body Fluids
INTRODUCTION
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids describes the patterns emerging from a pathology in the
transformation, production and movement of Qi and Blood and in
the transformation, transportation and excretion of Body Fluids.
The pathology of Qi includes Qi deficiency, Qi stagnation, Qi
sinking and rebellious Qi. The pathology of Blood includes Blood
deficiency, Blood stasis, Blood-Heat, Cold in the Blood and
bleeding. The pathology of Body Fluids includes deficiency of Body
2135
Fluids, oedema and Phlegm (Dampness is discussed under the
identification of patterns according to pathogenic factors).
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids overlaps with that according to the Eight Principles and that
according to the Internal Organs. For example, the pattern of Qi
deficiency is the same as the eponymous one in the identification
of patterns according to the Eight Principles.
The identification of patterns according to Qi, Blood and Body
Fluids is useful to give a general idea about the state of Qi, Blood
and Body Fluids; it is complementary to the patterns of the
Internal Organs, which provide further detail. For example, the
pattern of Blood deficiency within the Qi, Blood and Body Fluids
patterns gives only the general symptoms and signs of Blood
deficiency and the Internal Organs patterns of Liver-Blood and
Heart-Blood deficiency identify the organ involved.
An understanding of the pathology of Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang is
essential in practice because it reflects the way in which Qi, Blood
and Body Fluids are out of harmony; this always involves a
disruption of the ascending/descending and entering/exiting of Qi.
Although many of the Qi, Blood and Body Fluids patterns are
found in the Internal Organ patterns, some are not and these
deepen our understanding of clinical reality. For example, the
pattern of ‘Clear Yang not ascending’ has no direct correspondent
in the Internal Organ patterns.
2136
CHAPTER
101
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
QI, BLOOD, YANG
AND YIN
CHAPTER CONTENTS
QI
Qi deficiency
Qi sinking
Collapse of Qi
Qi stagnation
Rebellious Qi
Qi obstructed
BLOOD
2137
Blood deficiency
Blood stasis
Blood-Heat
Blood-Dryness
Blood-Cold
Loss of Blood
Collapse of Blood
YANG
Yang deficiency
Collapse of Yang
Clear Yang not ascending
YIN
Yin deficiency
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
Collapse of Yin
Turbid Yin not descending
Combined Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang
Yin and Yang both deficient
Qi and Blood both deficient
Qi and Yin both deficient
QI
Qi Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Slight shortness of breath, weak voice, spontaneous sweating, poor
2138
appetite, loose stools, tiredness, pale complexion, dislike of
speaking.
Pulse
 
Empty.
Qi Sinking
Clinical manifestations
Breathlessness, weak voice, spontaneous sweating, poor appetite,
loose stools, tiredness, pale complexion, dislike of speaking, a
feeling of bearing down, prolapse of organs (stomach, uterus,
anus, bladder), listlessness, chronic diarrhoea, chronic excessive
vaginal discharge, mental depression.
Pulse
 
Empty.
Collapse Of Qi
Clinical manifestations
Sudden profuse sweating, mental confusion or unconsciousness,
open eyes and hands, bright-white complexion, shortness of
breath, incontinence of urine and faeces.
Pulse
 
Minute.
Qi Stagnation
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of distension of chest, epigastrium or abdomen,
distending pain that moves from place to place, abdominal masses
that appear and disappear, abdominal distension and pain which
is not relieved by a 
bowel movement, premenstrual tension, breast
distension, irregular periods, painful periods, mental depression,
irritability, headache, constipation with bitty stools, a gloomy
feeling, mood swings, frequent sighing.
Tongue
 
In most cases, the tongue-body colour does not change
but it will be slightly Red on the sides in severe cases of Qi
stagnation.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
2139
Rebellious Qi
The clinical manifestations of rebellious Qi depend on the organ
involved.
Clinical manifestations
Stomach-Qi rebelling upwards
Belching, hiccup, nausea, vomiting, sour regurgitation.
Liver-Qi rebelling towards Stomach
Belching, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting.
Liver-Qi rebelling towards Spleen
Diarrhoea, alternation of diarrhoea and constipation.
Liver-Qi rebelling upwards
Headache, dizziness, irritability, epistaxis.
Lung-Qi rebelling upwards
Cough, breathlessness, asthma.
Heart-Qi rebelling upwards
Nausea, insomnia, mental restlessness.
Kidney-Qi rebelling upwards
Breathlessness, a feeling of energy rising from the lower abdomen
to the chest and throat, a feeling of tightness of the chest, a feeling
of heat in the face, cold feet. This is equivalent to the Qi of the
Penetrating Vessel rebelling upwards.
Qi Obstructed
Qi obstructed occurs when internal pathogenic factors completely
disrupt the proper flow of Qi and the balance of Yin and Yang,
obstructing the orifices; this is a Full pattern seen only in acute
cases, often with Phlegm, Fire, Wind and Blood stasis. The acute
stage of Wind-stroke is an example of this condition.
2140
Clinical manifestations
Sudden unconsciousness or intense, constant restlessness, red
face, tinnitus, rattling sound in the throat, clenched teeth,
clenched fists, constipation, retention of urine.
Tongue
 
Stiff and Deviated.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
BLOOD
Blood Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dull complexion, dizziness, numbness tingling of the limbs, poor
memory, blurred vision, insomnia, pale lips, dry eyes, white nails,
floaters, palpitations, scanty periods, amenorrhoea, infertility.
Tongue
 
Pale and Thin.
Pulse
 
Choppy or Fine.
Blood Stasis
Clinical manifestations
Dark complexion, purple lips, pain which is boring, fixed and
stabbing in character and may be aggravated at night, abdominal
masses that do not move, purple nails, purple petechiae, purple
venules, bleeding with dark blood and dark clots.
Tongue
 
Purple.
Pulse
 
Wiry, Firm or Choppy.
Liver
Purple nails, dark face, painful periods with dark menstrual blood
containing dark clots, abdominal pain, premenstrual pain,
irregular periods, infertility.
Tongue
 
Purple especially on the sides.
Pulse
 
Wiry or Firm.
Heart
2141
Purple lips, stabbing or pricking pain in the chest, palpitations,
mental restlessness, in severe cases psychosis.
Tongue
 
Purple on the sides towards the front, purple and
distended veins under the tongue.
Pulse
 
Choppy or Knotted.
Lungs
A feeling of oppression of the chest, chest pain, coughing of dark
blood.
Tongue
 
Purple in the front part or the sides in the centre section,
purple and distended veins under the tongue.
Stomach
Epigastric pain, vomiting of dark blood, dark blood in the stools.
Tongue
 
Purple in the centre.
Intestines
Severe abdominal pain, dark blood in the stools.
Uterus
Painful periods with severe stabbing pain that is usually unilateral,
premenstrual pain, irregular periods, heavy periods, menstrual
blood dark with clots, amenorrhoea, abdominal masses, infertility.
Tongue
 
Purple.
Limbs
Swelling and pain of the limbs, purple extremities, purple nails,
stiffness of the limbs.
Blood-Heat
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of heat, skin diseases with red eruptions, dry mouth,
bleeding.
Tongue
 
Red.
Pulse
 
Rapid.
2142
Heart
Red face, thirst, mental restlessness, insomnia, in severe cases
manic behaviour, a feeling of heat, palpitations, blood in the urine,
heavy periods.
Tongue
 
Red.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Full.
Liver
A feeling of heat, thirst, red skin eruptions, irritability, propensity
to outbursts of anger, epistaxis, red eyes, bitter taste, heavy
periods.
Tongue
 
Red.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Wiry.
Stomach
A feeling of heat, thirst, bleeding gums, vomiting of blood,
epigastric pain.
Tongue
 
Red.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Overflowing.
Blood-Dryness
Blood-Dryness occurs in conjunction with Blood deficiency and it
is an extreme case of it.
Clinical manifestations
Dull complexion, dizziness, numbness/tingling of the limbs, poor
memory, blurred vision, insomnia, pale lips, dry eyes, white nails,
‘floaters’, palpitations, scanty periods with dry menstrual blood,
amenorrhoea, irregular periods, dryness of the vagina, infertility,
dry mouth and throat, dry skin and hair, dry, withered nails, thin
body, dry stools, scanty urination, itching of the skin, very dry and
scaly skin.
Tongue
 
Pale, Thin and Dry.
Pulse
 
Choppy or Fine.
Blood-Cold
2143
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of cold, cold hands and feet, numbness of the limbs, dry
skin, a feeling of cold and pain of the chest, epigastrium or
abdomen, abdominal pain that is relieved by the application of
heat, bluish or dull-white complexion, painful periods, pain
alleviated by the application of heat, a feeling of cold during the
periods, scanty periods, delayed cycle, menstrual blood bright red
with small dark clots.
Tongue
 
Pale or Bluish-Purple.
Pulse
 
Choppy.
Loss Of Blood
Clinical manifestations
Nosebleed, vomiting of blood, coughing of blood, blood in the
stools, heavy periods, with flooding and trickling, blood in the
urine.
Collapse Of Blood
Collapse of Blood occurs with an acute, profuse, sudden
haemorrhage.
Clinical manifestations
Sudden, profuse haemorrhage, bright-white face, sudden loss of
lustre and moisture of the face, dizziness, blurred vision, ‘floaters’,
palpitations, shortness of breath, cold hands and feet, pale lips, in
severe cases unconsciousness.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Minute or Hollow.
YANG
Yang Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Shortness of breath, weak voice, spontaneous sweating, poor
2144
appetite, loose stools, tiredness, bright-pale complexion, dislike of
speaking, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, absence of thirst, desire for
hot drinks, frequent pale urination.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak.
Collapse Of Yang
Clinical manifestations
Chilliness, cold limbs, weak breathing, profuse sweating with
sweat like pearls, absence of thirst, profuse pale urination or
incontinence of urine, loose stools, incontinence of faeces, mental
confusion or unconsciousness.
Tongue
 
Pale-Wet-Short.
Pulse
 
Deep-Minute.
Clear Yang Not Ascending
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, blurred vision, tinnitus, a feeling of cold, cold limbs,
tiredness, weak muscles, poor appetite, loose stools.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Weak.
In this case, the dizziness and blurred vision are not due to
Blood deficiency but instead to the deficient clear Qi not ascending
and therefore not brightening the orifices. For the same reason, in
this case tinnitus is not due to a Kidney deficiency but rather to a
failure of clear Qi to ascend and brighten the ear orifices.
YIN
Yin Deficiency
Clinical manifestations
Dry mouth, dry throat at night, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus,
tiredness, thin body, insomnia.
Tongue
 
Without coating.
2145
Pulse
 
Fine or Floating-Empty.
Yin Deficiency With Empty-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Dry mouth, dry throat at night, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus,
tiredness, thin body, insomnia, five-palm heat, a feeling of heat in
the evening, scanty dark urine, dry stools.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid or Floating-Empty.
Collapse Of Yin
Clinical manifestations
Abundant perspiration, skin hot to the touch, hot limbs, dry
mouth, retention of urine, constipation.
Tongue
 
Red, Short without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty-Rapid.
Turbid Yin Not Descending
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of distension and oppression of the epigastrium, poor
appetite, loose stools or constipation, scanty urine, urine retention,
a feeling of heaviness of the body, lethargy, oedema of the ankles.
Tongue
 
Sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Soggy.
COMBINED QI, BLOOD, YIN AND
YANG
Yin And Yang Both Deficient
Clinical manifestations
Thin body, depression, shortness of breath, dislike of speaking,
tiredness, cold limbs, a feeling of cold, sweating and a feeling of
2146
heat on slight exertion, palpitations, blurred vision, dizziness,
tinnitus.
Tongue
 
Either Pale or Red.
Pulse
 
Fine or Weak.
Qi And Blood Both Deficient
Clinical manifestations
Tiredness, loose stools, poor appetite, weak muscles, weak voice,
dislike of speaking, spontaneous sweating, 
palpitations, blurred
vision, dizziness, shortness of breath, dull-pale complexion,
numbness/tingling of the limbs, scanty periods, late periods, heavy
periods.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Weak or Choppy.
Qi And Yin Both Deficient
Clinical manifestations
Tiredness, loose stools, poor appetite, weak muscles, weak voice,
dislike of speaking, spontaneous sweating, shortness of breath,
dry throat, dry mouth, dry cough, dry eyes, a feeling of heat in the
afternoon.
Tongue
 
Without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine.
2147
CHAPTER
102
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
BODY FLUIDS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
DEFICIENCY OF BODY FLUIDS
OEDEMA
PHLEGM
Wind-Phlegm
Phlegm-Heat
Cold-Phlegm
Damp-Phlegm
Dry-Phlegm
Qi-Phlegm
Food-Phlegm
2148
Phlegm with Blood stasis
Phlegm-Fluids
Phlegm under the skin
Phlegm in the channels
Phlegm misting the Heart
Phlegm in the joints
Phlegm in the Gall-Bladder
Phlegm in the Kidneys
Shock-Phlegm
Wine-Phlegm
DEFICIENCY OF BODY FLUIDS
Clinical manifestations
Dry skin, mouth, nose, lips, throat, eyes, cracked lips, dry cough,
hoarse voice, absence of sweating, scanty urination, dry stools,
scanty periods.
Tongue
 
Dry.
Lungs
Dry throat, dry cough, dry skin.
Stomach
Dry mouth, thirst with a desire to sip liquids, dry tongue.
Kidneys
Dry throat, dry skin, scanty urination.
Large Intestine
Dry stools.
2149
Liver
Dry eyes, dry skin, scanty periods.
OEDEMA
Clinical manifestations
Pitting oedema of the face, hands, abdomen, ankles or legs, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, a feeling of heaviness of the
body, scanty urination.
Tongue
 
Swollen.
PHLEGM
The patterns caused by Phlegm are:
 
• 
 
Wind-Phlegm
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat
• 
 
Cold-Phlegm
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm
• 
 
Dry-Phlegm
• 
 
Qi-Phlegm
• 
 
Food-Phlegm
• 
 
Phlegm with Blood stasis
• 
 
Phlegm-Fluids
• 
 
Phlegm under the skin
• 
 
Phlegm in the channels
• 
 
Phlegm misting the Heart
• 
 
Phlegm in the joints
• 
 
Phlegm in the Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Phlegm in the Kidneys
• 
 
Shock-Phlegm
• 
 
Wine-Phlegm.
Wind-Phlegm
2150
Clinical manifestations
Severe dizziness, nausea, vomiting, numbness of the limbs,
coughing of phlegm, a feeling of oppression of the chest, blurred
vision, a rattling sound in the throat, slurred speech.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Slippery.
In cases of Wind-stroke, manifestations also include: aphasia,
deviation of eyes and mouth, hemiplegia and a Swollen-Deviated
tongue.
Phlegm-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Cough with expectoration of profuse yellow sputum, which may be
blood tinged, a feeling of oppression of the chest, dark eye sockets,
red cheekbones, red face, thirst, oily skin, breathlessness, chest
pain, insomnia, dark urine, a feeling of heat, mental restlessness.
Tongue
 
Red-Swollen with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Slippery.
Cold-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Cough with expectoration of watery white sputum, a feeling of
cold, cold hands and feet, nausea, vomiting, a feeling of
oppression of the chest and epigastrium, dull-white complexion,
pale urine.
Tongue
 
Pale-Swollen with wet-white coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Slow.
Damp-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Cough with easy expectoration of profuse, sticky white sputum, a
feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, breathlessness,
rattling sound in the throat, dark eye sockets, sallow-greyish
complexion, a feeling of heaviness, tendency to obesity, swollen
2151
hands and feet, poor appetite, nausea, dizziness, blurred vision,
oily skin.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
Dry-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Sputum in the chest that is difficult to expectorate, bouts of dry
cough followed by expectoration of sticky sputum, breathlessness,
dull-white complexion, dark eye sockets, dry throat, dry nose and
lips, dry mouth but no desire to drink.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky dry coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
Qi-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of a lump in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, a feeling
of oppression of the chest and diaphragm, mental depression,
irritability, nausea, sighing.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
Food-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Cough with abundant sputum, nausea, vomiting, sour
regurgitation, belching, a feeling of fullness in the epigastrium, a
feeling of oppression of the chest and 
epigastrium, epigastric pain
after eating that is better after bowel movement.
Tongue
 
Swollen with thick sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
Phlegm With Blood Stasis
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of oppression of the chest, numbness/tingling of the
limbs, pain in the joints, stiffness and rigidity of joints, abdominal
2152
masses, fibroids, goitre, mental restlessness, insomnia, dark eye
sockets.
Tongue
 
Purple-Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Wiry or Slippery-Firm.
Phlegm-Fluids
Clinical manifestations
Phlegm-Fluids in Stomach and Intestines (
Tan Yin
 
)
Abdominal fullness and distension, nausea, vomiting of watery
fluids, splashing sound in the stomach, dry mouth without a
desire to drink, palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, a
feeling of oppression of the chest, loose stools, loss of weight.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Wiry or Deep-Slippery.
Phlegm-Fluids in the hypochondrium (
Xuan Yin
 
)
Hypochondrial pain which is worse on coughing and breathing, a
feeling of distension and pulling of the hypochondrium, shortness
of breath.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Slippery-Wiry.
Phlegm-Fluids in the limbs (
Yi Yin
 
)
A feeling of heaviness of the body, pain in the muscles, absence of
sweating, lack of desire to drink, cough with profuse watery
sputum, swelling of the limbs, lethargy, breathlessness.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Slippery or Tight-Slippery.
Phlegm-Fluids above the diaphragm (
Zhi Yin
 
)
Cough with watery white sputum, breathlessness, swelling of the
limbs, dizziness, inability to lie down, swollen face, a feeling of
cold.
Tongue
 
Swollen with sticky white coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
2153
Phlegm Under The Skin
Clinical manifestations
Lumps or nodules under the skin, nerve-ganglia swellings,
swelling of lymph nodes, swelling of the thyroid, lipoma.
Phlegm In The Channels
Clinical manifestations
Numbness/tingling in the limbs (seen in Wind-stroke).
Phlegm Misting The Heart
Clinical manifestations
Inappropriate laughter or crying, dull thinking, hypomania, manic
behaviour, manic depression, psychosis.
Phlegm In The Joints
Clinical manifestations
Swelling and deformities of joints seen in Chronic Painful
Obstruction Syndrome (often seen in rheumatoid arthritis).
Phlegm In The Gall-Bladder
Clinical manifestations
Gall-Bladder stones.
Phlegm In The Kidneys
Clinical manifestations
Kidney stones.
Shock-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Pain in the heart region, a feeling of oppression in the chest,
2154
anxiety, mental restlessness following a shock.
This pattern is supposed to occur when a severe shock displaces
the Spirit from the Heart and its place is taken by Phlegm.
Pulse
 
Moving.
Wine-Phlegm
Clinical manifestations
Nausea, vomiting, a feeling of fullness of the epigastrium, foul
breath, a rattling sound in the throat, purple nose, purple
complexion, a feeling of oppression of the chest.
This pattern is seen in older people with Phlegm deriving from
excessive alcohol consumption.
Tongue
 
Reddish-Purple and Swollen with a sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
2155
SECTION 3
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING
TO
PATHOGENIC
FACTORS, FOUR
LEVELS, SIX
STAGES AND
THREE
2156
BURNERS
2157
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC
FACTORS, FOUR
LEVELS, SIX
STAGES AND
THREE BURNERS
 
Section contents
103. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
pathogenic factors
104. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
2158
the Four Levels
105. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Six Stages
106. 
 
Identification of patterns according to
the Three Burners
107. 
 
Residual pathogenic factor
INTRODUCTION
This section includes two separate methods of pattern
identification:
 
• 
 
the identification of patterns according to pathogenic
factors
• 
 
the identification of patterns according to the Four
Levels, Six Stages and Three Burners.
In addition to these, the patterns formed by residual pathogenic
factors will also be discussed.
Identification of patterns according to pathogenic
factors
The method of identification of patterns according to pathogenic
factors describes the patterns formed when the body is invaded by
external pathogenic factors such as Dampness, Wind, Cold,
Dryness and Summer-Heat. However, since the symptoms and
signs of the corresponding internal pathogenic factors are similar,
these are usually discussed within this type of identification of
pattern: this also includes the discussion of Fire, which is an
internal pathogenic factor with no corresponding external factor.
Pathogenic factors invade the body in various forms, which are
Wind, Cold, Dampness, Summer-Heat, Dryness and Fire. Each of
these, with the exception of Fire, can be of exterior or interior
2159
origin. From the point of view of the Eight Principles, they always
correspond to a Full pattern.
Although these pathogenic factors are causes of disease, and
due to weather, they have a greater importance as patterns of
disharmony. In fact, the diagnosis of a pathogenic factor is made
not on the basis of the patient’s history (i.e. whether he or she was
exposed to that particular climatic factor), but on the basis of the
pattern of symptoms and signs presented. Of course, when
considered as causes of disease, climatic factors have a definite,
direct influence on the body and they attack it in a way that
corresponds to their nature. For example, a person exposed to a
hot, dry climate is likely to develop a pattern of invasion of ‘Wind-
Dryness’. However, when considered as pathogenic factors,
climatic influences are somewhat irrelevant as the diagnosis is
made only on the basis of the clinical manifestations. For example,
if a person has a runny nose, aversion to cold, sneezing, a
headache, a stiff neck, a cough and a Floating pulse, these clinical
manifestations denote a pattern of exterior Wind-Cold. 
It is
irrelevant whether this person was exposed to climatic cold or not
and it is not usually necessary to ask.
Some internally generated pathogenic factors give rise to
pathological signs and symptoms similar to those caused by
exterior climatic factors. These will be discussed together with the
relevant exterior pathogenic factor.
The pathogenic factors discussed are:
 
• 
 
Wind
• 
 
Cold
• 
 
Summer-Heat
• 
 
Dampness
• 
 
Dryness
• 
 
Fire.
Identification of patterns according to the Four Levels,
Six Stages and Three Burners
These methods of identifying patterns also describe the
2160
symptomatology of pathogenic factors, but specifically those
caused by acute invasions of Wind: Wind-Cold in the case of the
Six Stages and Wind-Heat in the case of the Four Levels and Three
Burners.
Identification of patterns according to the Six Stages
The identification of patterns according to the Six Stages is the
oldest method as it is derived from Zhang Zhong Jing’s
‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ (c. 
AD
 
220) (see Shang Han
Lung Research Group in Bibliography). It describes the patterns
arising when the patient is invaded by external Wind and
especially Wind-Cold. These six patterns are the Greater Yang,
Lesser Yang, Bright Yang, Greater Yin, Lesser Yin and Terminal Yin,
representing six energetic layers of penetration of external Wind.
Of these, the Greater-Yang stage is the only exterior stage; that is,
at that stage the pathogenic factor (Wind-Cold) is on the Exterior
and in the Lungs Defensive-Qi portion.
Identification of patterns according to the Four Levels
The identification of patterns according to the Four Levels was
formulated primarily by Ye Tian Shi and set out in his book
‘Discussion of Warm Diseases’ (
Wen Bing Lun
 
, 1746). It describes
the patterns arising when the patient is invaded by external Wind-
Heat. These patterns consist of four levels: the Defensive-Qi, Qi,
Nutritive-Qi and Blood Levels. They involve four levels of Heat, the
first being external Wind-Heat and the other three internal Heat.
The identification of patterns according to the Four Levels is
closely linked to the clinical entity of Warm Diseases (
Wen Bing
 
).
Warm Diseases are caused by Wind-Heat, but not every invasion of
external Wind-Heat leads to a Warm Disease. Warm Diseases have
the following characteristics:
 
• 
 
they are all caused by external Wind-Heat
• 
 
they all present with fever
• 
 
they all have a tendency to injure Yin and Body Fluids
quickly
• 
 
they are infectious (a new idea in Chinese medicine)
• 
 
they penetrate via the nose and mouth (until the
development of the Warm Disease School, external
2161
Wind was thought to enter the body via the skin).
Identification of patterns according to the Three Burners
The identification of patterns according to the Three Burners is
quite similar to that in relation to the Four Levels. It was
formulated by Wu Ju Tong in the Qing dynasty. Many of the
patterns are essentially the same as those of the Four Levels,
except that they are seen from the perspective of the Three
Burners, that is, patterns of the Upper Burner, Middle Burner and
Lower Burner. The Middle Burner patterns correspond to the Qi
level while those of the Lower Burner correspond to the Nutritive-
Qi and Blood levels. By contrast, the patterns of the Upper Burner
encompass the Defensive-Qi, Qi and Nutritive-Qi levels.
Table P6.S3.1
 
illustrates the connections between the Four Levels
and the Three Burners patterns.
Table P6.S3.1
Relationship between Three Burners and Four Levels patterns
Burner
Pattern
Level
Upper Burner
Invasion of Lungs
Defensive Qi
 
Defensive-Qi system
 
 
Heat in Lungs
Qi
 
Heat in Pericardium
Nutritive Qi
Middle Burner
Heat in Bright Yang
 
 
Damp-Heat in
Qi
 
Stomach and Spleen
 
Lower Burner
Heat in Kidneys
 
 
Liver-Heat stirs Wind
Nutritive Qi, Blood
 
Liver Empty-Wind
 
Figure 104.6 (p. 961)
 
shows the relationship between the Three
Burners and the Four Levels. 
Figure 104.7 (p. 962)
 
shows the
relationship between the Three Burners and the Six Stages. 
Figures
104.8 (p. 963)
 
show the relationship between the Three Burners,
the Four Levels and the Six Stages.
Essential differences between the three identifications
of patterns
2162
 
• 
 
Six Stages
 
: the three Yang patterns all have
Full-Cold; the three Yin patterns all have
Empty-Cold.
• 
 
Four Levels
 
: mostly Full-Heat patterns.
• 
 
Three Burners
 
: Upper Burner mostly has Heat
patterns
Middle Burner mostly has
Damp-Heat patterns
Lower Burner mostly has Yin deficiency.
Residual pathogenic factor patterns
A residual pathogenic factor occurs when the body is invaded by
an external pathogen, which penetrates to the Interior. The patient
appears to recover but there is a ‘residual’ pathogenic factor which
encumbers the body’s physiology of Qi and predisposes the person
to a further attack of a pathogenic factor.
A residual pathogenic factor is formed mostly when the patient
does not rest during an invasion of an external pathogen; this
weakens Qi, the body does not react fully to the external invasion
and, although the patient appears to recover, some pathogen is left
in the body. This process is also often caused by the excessive use
of antibiotics for relatively minor infections: antibiotics ‘kill’ the
bacteria but they do not clear Heat, nor do they resolve Phlegm or
Dampness. By killing the bacteria and eliminating the fever,
antibiotics may encourage the patient to ignore the seriousness of
an external invasion; as a result, the patient does not rest and
returns to work too quickly, thus favouring the formation of a
pathogenic factor. Antibiotics favour the formation of a residual
pathogenic factor also because they injure Stomach-Qi and
Stomach-Yin; by doing so, they favour the formation of Dampness
or Phlegm.
2163
CHAPTER
103
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC
FACTORS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
WIND
Exterior Wind
Interior Wind
COLD
Exterior Cold
Interior Cold
SUMMER-Heat
DAMPNESS
2164
External Dampness
Internal Dampness
DRYNESS
External Dryness
Internal Dryness
FIRE
INTRODUCTION
Pathogenic factors invade the body in various forms, which are
Wind, Cold, Dampness, Summer-Heat, Dryness and Fire. Each of
these, with the exception of Fire, can be of exterior or interior
origin. From the point of view of the Eight Principles, they always
correspond to a Full pattern.
Although these pathogenic factors are also causes of disease due
to weather, they have greater importance as patterns of
disharmony. In other words, if a person displays all the clinical
manifestations of Dampness (e.g. epigastric fullness, a feeling of
heaviness, sticky taste, etc.), we can safely diagnose a pattern of
Dampness, irrespective of whether that person was exposed to
climatic dampness or not.
Some internally generated pathogenic factors give rise to
pathological signs and symptoms similar to those caused by the
exterior climatic factors. These will be discussed together with the
relevant exterior pathogenic factor.
The pathogenic factors are:
 
1. 
 
Wind
2. 
 
Cold
3. 
 
Summer–Hit
4. 
 
Dampness
5. 
 
Dryness
6. 
 
Fire
2165
WIND
Wind is Yang in nature and tends to injure Blood and Yin. It is
often the vehicle through which other 
climatic factors invade the
body. For example, Cold will often enter the body as Wind-Cold
and Heat as Wind-Heat.
The clinical manifestations due to Wind mimic the action of
wind itself in nature, which arises quickly and changes rapidly,
moves swiftly, blows intermittently and sways the top of trees.
There is a saying that captures the clinical characteristics of
Wind: 
‘Sudden rigidity is due to Wind’
 
.
 
1
 
This refers to the clinical
manifestations resulting from both interior and exterior Wind. In
fact, interior Wind can cause paralysis (as in Wind-stroke) and
exterior Wind can cause facial paralysis or simply stiffness of the
neck.
The main clinical manifestations of Wind are listed in 
Box 103.1
 
.
 
BOX 103.1
 
   
 
CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF WIND
• 
 
Onset is rapid
• 
 
Causes rapid changes in symptoms and signs
• 
 
Causes symptoms and signs to move from place to
place in the body
• 
 
Can cause tremors or convulsions, but also stiffness
or paralysis
• 
 
Affects the top part of the body
• 
 
Affects the Lungs first
• 
 
Affects the skin
• 
 
Causes itching
Tremors, convulsions and paralysis apply only to interior Wind
(except for facial paralysis, which can be caused by exterior Wind).
Invasion of the Lungs applies only to external Wind. All the other
manifestations listed apply to both exterior and interior Wind.
Exterior Wind
2166
The symptoms and signs of invasion of exterior Wind are:
 
• 
 
aversion to cold or wind
• 
 
sneezing, cough
• 
 
runny nose
• 
 
possibly fever
• 
 
occipital stiffness and ache
• 
 
itchy throat
• 
 
sweating or not (depending on whether Wind or Cold
is predominant)
• 
 
Floating pulse.
Besides this, exterior Wind can invade the channels of the face
directly and cause deviation of mouth and eyebrows (facial
paralysis).
Exterior Wind can also invade any channel, particularly the Yang
channels, and can settle in the joints, causing stiffness and pain
there (Painful Obstruction Syndrome). The pain would typically be
‘wandering’, moving from one joint to the other on different days.
Finally, Wind can also affect some Internal Organs, principally
the Liver. Wind pertains to Wood and the Liver according to the
Five-Element system of correspondences. The relationship can
often be observed when a person prone to migraine headaches is
affected by a period of windy weather (particularly an easterly
wind) causing a neck ache and headache.
Box 103.2
 
summarizes the patterns of exterior Wind invasion.
 
BOX 103.2
 
   
 
EXTERIOR WIND
• 
 
Invasion of Wind in the Lungs Defensive-Qi portion
(common cold)
• 
 
Invasion of Wind in the channels of the face (facial
paralysis)
• 
 
Invasion of Wind in the channels and joints (Painful
Obstruction Syndrome)
• 
 
Affliction of the Liver channel by external Wind
(Liver-Yang headache elicited by external Wind)
2167
Wind combines with other pathogenic factors and primarily
Cold, Heat, Dampness and Water. Therefore, I will outline the
clinical manifestation of four types of exterior Wind:
 
• 
 
Wind-Cold
• 
 
Wind-Heat
• 
 
Wind-Dampness
• 
 
Wind-Water.
Wind-Cold
The symptoms and signs of Wind-Cold are: aversion to cold,
shivering, sneezing, cough, runny nose with watery white mucus,
either no fever or only a slight fever, occipital stiffness and ache,
clear urine, body aches, itchy throat, lack of thirst, tongue body
colour unchanged, with thin white coating, Floating-Tight pulse.
These are the general symptoms of Wind-Cold. There are,
however, two separate patterns of invasion of Wind-Cold: one with
a predominance of Wind 
(called Attack of Wind) and the other
with a predominance of Cold (called Attack of Cold). The former is
more likely to occur when the patient’s Upright Qi is weak (and is
treated with Gui Zhi Tang 
Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
 
); the
latter occurs when the patient’s Upright Qi is relatively strong (and
is treated with Ma Huang Tang 
Ephedra Decoction
 
). In Attack of
Wind there is slight sweating, in Attack of Cold there is no
sweating.
Wind-Cold – Attack of Wind
Aversion to wind or slight aversion to cold, slight fever, slight
sweating, headache, occipital stiffness, sneezing, thin white tongue
coating, Floating-Slow pulse.
Wind-Cold – Attack of Cold
Aversion to cold, slight fever, severe occipital stiffness/headache,
body aches, absence of sweating, sneezing, runny nose with white
discharge, breathlessness, thin white tongue coating, Floating-
Tight pulse.
2168
Table 103.1
 
differentiates between Attack of Cold and Attack of
Wind.
Table 103.1
Differentiation between Attack of Cold and Attack of Wind in
Wind-Cold
Wind-Heat
The symptoms and signs of Wind-Heat are: aversion to cold,
sneezing, cough, runny nose with slightly yellow mucus, fever,
occipital stiffness and ache, slight sweating, itchy or very sore
throat, swollen tonsils, body aches, slighty dark urine, slight thirst,
tongue-body colour slightly Red on the front or sides, or both (not
in every case) with thin white coating, Floating-Rapid pulse.
Table 103.2
 
differentiates between the symptoms of Wind-Cold
and those of Wind-Heat.
2169
Table 103.2
Differentiation between Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat manifestations
Wind-Dampness
The symptoms and signs of Wind-Dampness are: aversion to cold,
fever, swollen glands, nausea, sweating, occipital stiffness, body
aches, muscle ache, a feeling of heaviness of the body, swollen
joints, Floating-Slippery pulse.
Wind-Water
The symptoms and signs of Wind-Water are: aversion to cold,
fever, oedema, especially on the face, swollen face and eyes, cough
with profuse white and watery mucus, sweating, absence of thirst,
Floating pulse.
Interior Wind
The main clinical manifestations of interior Wind are: tremors,
tics, severe dizziness, vertigo and numbness. In severe cases, they
are: convulsions, unconsciousness, opisthotonos, hemiplegia and
deviation of the mouth.
Interior Wind is always related to a Liver disharmony. It can
arise from three different conditions:
2170
1. 
 
Extreme Heat Extreme Heat can give rise to Liver-Wind. This
happens in the late stages of febrile diseases when the Heat enters
the Blood portion and generates Wind. This process is like the
wind generated by a large forest fire. The clinical manifestations
are a high fever, delirium, coma and opisthotonos. These signs are
frequently seen in meningitis and are due to Wind in the Liver and
Heat in the Pericardium.
2. 
 
Liver-Yang Liver-Yang rising can produce Liver-Wind in
prolonged cases. The clinical manifestations are severe dizziness,
vertigo, headache and irritability.
3. 
 
Deficiency of Liver-Blood Finally, deficiency of Liver-Blood can
also give rise to Empty Liver-Wind. This is due to the deficiency of
Blood creating an empty space within the blood vessels, which is
taken up by interior Wind. This could be compared to the draughts
generated sometimes in certain underground (subway) stations.
The clinical manifestations are numbness, dizziness, blurred
vision, tics and slight tremors (in Chinese called ‘chicken feet
Wind’ as the tremors are like the jerky movements of chickens’ feet
when they are scouring the ground for food). Empty-Wind can also
result from Liver-Yin deficiency.
Box 103.3
 
summarizes the patterns of interior Wind.
 
BOX 103.3
 
   
 
INTERIOR WIND
• 
 
Extreme Heat generating Wind (Blood level of Four
Levels)
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising turning into Liver-Wind
• 
 
Liver-Blood (or Liver-Yin) deficiency giving rise to
(Empty) Wind
COLD
Cold is a Yin pathogenic factor and, as such, it tends to injure
Yang. Cold can be exterior or interior.
Exterior Cold
Cold, spearheaded by Wind, can invade the Exterior of the body
2171
and give rise to symptoms of Wind-Cold, already described above.
Cold can also invade the channels directly and cause Painful
Obstruction Syndrome, with pain in one or more joints, chilliness
and contraction of the tendons.
Apart from invading muscles, channels and joints, Cold can also
invade three of the Internal Organs directly. These are the Stomach
(causing epigastric pain and vomiting), the Intestines (causing
abdominal pain and diarrhoea) and the Uterus (causing acute
dysmenorrhoea). In all three cases the symptoms would be
accompanied by chilliness and the pain would be alleviated by the
application of heat.
Box 103.4
 
summarizes the patterns of external Cold invasion.
 
BOX 103.4
 
   
 
EXTERNAL COLD
INVASION
• 
 
External Cold (with Wind) invasion in the Lung
Defensive-Qi portion (common cold)
• 
 
Invasion of Cold in the channels and joints (Painful
Obstruction Syndrome)
• 
 
Invasion of external Cold in organs directly (Stomach,
Intestines and Uterus)
— 
 
Stomach: vomiting and epigastric pain
— 
 
Intestines: diarrhoea and abdominal
pain
— 
 
Uterus: acute dysmenorrhoea
Cold contracts tissues and it obstructs the circulation of Yang Qi
and Blood causing pain. Hence there is a saying: 
‘
Retention of Cold
causes pain.
 
’
 
2
Pain is therefore a frequent manifestation of Cold. Other
symptoms are stiffness, contraction of tendons and chilliness.
Cold can invade any part of the body and any joint, but the most
common places it invades are the hands and arms, feet and knees,
lower back and shoulders.
Cold is often manifested with thin, watery and clear fluid
2172
discharges, such as a clear white discharge from the nose, very
pale urine, watery loose stools and clear watery vaginal discharges.
Another saying clarifies this characteristic of Cold: 
‘
A disease
characterized by thin, clear, watery and cool discharges is due to
Cold.
 
’
 
3
Box 103.5
 
summarizes the signs of symptoms of exterior Cold.
 
BOX 103.5
 
   
 
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF
EXTERIOR COLD
• 
 
Severe pain (ameliorated by application of heat)
• 
 
Stiffness of muscles
• 
 
Contraction of tendons
• 
 
Feeling of cold
• 
 
Thin, watery fluid discharges
Interior Cold
Interior Cold can be Full or Empty. The clinical manifestations of
Full- and Empty-Cold are very similar as they are the same in
nature. The main difference is that Full-Cold is characterized by an
acute onset, severe pain and a tongue and pulse of the Excess type;
for example the tongue would have a thick white coating and the
pulse would be Full and Tight. Empty-Cold is characterized by a
gradual onset, dull pain and a tongue and pulse of the Deficiency
type; for example the tongue would have a thin white coating and
be Pale and the pulse would be Empty or Weak.
Interior Full-Cold
Interior Full-Cold originates from climatic cold, which either
invades the channels, causing Painful Obstruction Syndrome, or
invades certain organs directly. Both these cases have been
mentioned above.
Generally speaking, Interior Full-Cold can last only a relatively
short time. After prolonged retention, interior Cold consumes the
Yang of the Spleen, giving rise to Empty-Cold. Thus a Full-Cold
pattern can turn into an Empty-Cold one.
2173
Interior Empty-Cold
Interior Empty-Cold arises from deficiency of Yang, usually of the
Spleen, Lungs or Kidneys. In this case the Cold does not come
from outside the body, but is interiorly generated by deficiency of
Yang.
The general symptoms are chilliness, dull pain, cold limbs, a
desire to drink warm liquids, lack of thirst, a pale face, a thin white
tongue coating and a Deep, Weak and Slow pulse. Other
symptoms vary according to which organ is mostly affected. The
Heart, Lungs, Spleen, Kidneys can all suffer from deficiency of
Yang and interior Cold.
Table 103.3
 
lists the clinical manifestations of Full- and Empty-
Cold.
Table 103.3
Differentiation between Full- and Empty-Cold
 
Full-Cold
Empty-Cold
Onset
Acute
Chronic
Pain
Intense, crampy
Dull
Tongue
Thick white coating
Thin white coating, Pale body
Pulse
Full-Tight-Slow
Weak-Deep-Slow
The symptoms of Heart-Yang deficiency (in addition to the
above-mentioned general symptoms) with interior Cold are
stuffiness and pain in the chest, purple lips and a Knotted pulse.
In Lung-Yang deficiency they are a tendency to catch colds,
sweating and a cough with white mucus. In Spleen-Yang deficiency
they are diarrhoea or loose stools and lack of appetite. In Kidney-
Yang deficiency they are frequent, pale and profuse urination,
lower backache, cold feet and knees and impotence in men or
white leucorrhoea in women.
The manifestations of Yang deficiency of the various organs have
been discussed in greater detail in the chapters on the
identification of patterns according to the Internal Organs.
Box 103.6
 
summarizes the types of Empty-Cold.
 
BOX 103.6
 
   
 
EMPTY-COLD
• 
 
Heart-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Spleen-Yang deficiency
2174
• 
 
Lung-Yang deficiency
• 
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
SUMMER-HEAT
Summer-Heat is a Yang pathogenic factor and, as such, it tends to
injure Yin. This pathogenic factor is slightly different from the
others, in so far as it is definitely related to a specific season since
it can occur only in summer.
The main clinical manifestations are aversion to cold, sweating,
headache, scanty dark urine, dry lips, thirst, a Floating-Rapid pulse
and a Red tongue on the sides and front. Note that there is
aversion to cold in the beginning stages because the Summer-Heat
invades the Defensive-Qi portion and Defensive Qi fails to warm
the muscles.
In severe cases, Heat can invade the Pericardium and cause
clouding of the mind, manifesting with delirium, slurred speech or
unconsciousness.
Box 103.7
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of Summer-
Heat.
 
BOX 103.7
 
   
 
SUMMER-HEAT
• 
 
Aversion to cold
• 
 
Sweating
• 
 
Headache
• 
 
Scanty dark urine
• 
 
Dry lips
• 
 
Thirst
• 
 
Floating-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Tongue Red on sides and front
DAMPNESS
Dampness is a Yin pathogenic factor and it tends to injure Yang.
2175
The term refers not only to damp weather, but also to such
conditions as living in a damp house. Exterior Dampness can also
be caught by wearing wet clothes, wading in water, working in
damp places or sitting on damp ground.
The characteristics of Dampness are that it is sticky, it is difficult
to get rid of, it is heavy, it slows things down, it infuses downwards
and it causes repeated attacks. When exterior Dampness invades
the body, it tends to invade the lower part first, typically the legs.
From the legs, it can flow upwards in the leg channels to settle in
any of the pelvic cavity organs. If it settles in the female genital
system it causes vaginal discharges, if it settles in the Intestines it
will cause loose stools and if it settles in the Bladder it will cause
difficulty, frequency and burning of urination.
The clinical manifestations of Dampness are extremely varied
according to its location and nature (hot or cold), but the general
ones are a feeling of heaviness of body or head, lack of appetite, a
feeling of fullness of chest or epigastrium, a sticky taste, urinary
difficulty, a white sticky vaginal discharge, a sticky tongue coating
and a Slippery or Soggy pulse.
Box 103.8
 
summarizes the manifestations of Dampness.
 
BOX 103.8
 
   
 
GENERAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF DAMPNESS
• 
 
Feeling of heaviness
• 
 
Poor appetite
• 
 
Feeling of fullness
• 
 
Sticky taste
• 
 
Urinary difficulty
• 
 
Vaginal discharge
• 
 
Sticky tongue coating
• 
 
Slippery or Soggy pulse
The clinical manifestations of Dampness can be classified
according to its location as follows:
 
• 
 
Head: feeling of heaviness and muzziness of the head
• 
 
Eyes: red swollen eyelids, eyes oozing fluid, styes
2176
• 
 
Mouth: mouth ulcers on gums, swollen-red lips
• 
 
Stomach and Spleen: feeling of fullness/oppression of
epigastrium, feeling of fullness after eating, sticky taste,
loose stools, poor appetite, Soggy pulse
• 
 
Lower Burner: excessive vaginal discharge, painful
periods, infertility, turbid urine, difficult and painful
urination, scrotal sweating or eczema, genital eczema,
genital itching
• 
 
Skin: papules (Damp-Heat with more Heat), pustules,
vesicles (Dampness without Heat), greasy sweat, boils,
any oozing skin lesion
• 
 
Joints: swollen-painful joints (Fixed Painful
Obstruction Syndrome, also Wandering Painful
Obstruction Syndrome if mixed with Wind)
• 
 
Connecting channels: numbness and loss of
sensation.
The various clinical manifestations can be correlated to the
following main characteristics of Dampness.
Heaviness
 
This causes a feeling of tiredness, heaviness of limbs
or head, or a ‘muzzy’ feeling of the head. Since Dampness is heavy
it causes a feeling of fullness and oppression of chest or
epigastrium, and it tends to settle in the Lower Burner. However,
Dampness often affects the head too causing the above-mentioned
symptoms. This happens because it prevents the clear Yang from
ascending to the head to brighten the sense orifices and clear the
brain.
Dirtiness
 
Dampness is dirty and is reflected in dirty discharges,
such as cloudy urine, vaginal discharges or skin diseases
characterized by thick and dirty fluids oozing out, such as in
certain types of eczema.
Stickiness
 
Dampness is sticky and this is reflected in a sticky
tongue coating, sticky taste and Slippery pulse. The sticky nature
of Dampness also accounts for its being very difficult to get rid of.
It often becomes chronic, manifesting in frequent, recurrent bouts.
Dampness can also cause a large variety of diseases according to
2177
its location. There are three locations: the Internal Organs, the
channels and the skin. The range of disease according to the
location of Dampness is as follows.
Internal Organs
 
In the Stomach and Spleen there may be
epigastric pain and fullness, poor digestion, feeling of fullness, a
sticky taste, or a poor appetite. In the Gall-Bladder hypochondrial
pain and fullness are seen. In the bladder there may be difficult
and painful urination, and cloudy urine. In the Uterus Dampness
may cause infertility, or excessive vaginal discharge. In the
Intestines there may be loose stools with mucus, abdominal pain
and fullness. Dampness in the Kidneys may manifest as cloudy
urine, or difficult urination. In the Liver it may cause
hypochondrial fullness, distension and pain, or jaundice.
Channels
 
In the joints Dampness can cause Painful Obstruction
Syndrome. In the head there may be a feeling of heaviness of the
head, or headache.
Skin
 
Dampness is the cause of an enormous number of skin
diseases manifesting with oozing skin lesions, papules, vesicles or
pustules.
The classification of Dampness is quite complex and can be
divided into the two broad categories of external or internal
Dampness.
Within each of these are a number of subcategories. 
Box 103.9
summarizes the classification of Dampness.
 
BOX 103.9
 
   
 
CATEGORIES OF EXTERNAL
AND INTERNAL DAMPNESS
External
• 
 
Simple invasion of Dampness in the Internal Organs
— 
 
External invasion of Dampness in
Bladder
— 
 
External invasion of Dampness in
Stomach
— 
 
External invasion of Dampness in
Intestines
— 
 
External invasion of Dampness in
2178
Uterus
— 
 
External invasion of Dampness in Gall-
Bladder
• 
 
Invasion of acute, external Dampness in channels
• 
 
Invasion of External Damp-Heat at Defensive-Qi level
— 
 
External Damp-Heat
— 
 
External Summer-Heat with Dampness
Internal
Chronic
• 
 
Internal Dampness in Internal Organs
— 
 
Dampness in Stomach and Spleen
— 
 
Dampness in Bladder
— 
 
Dampness in Intestines
— 
 
Dampness in Uterus
— 
 
Dampness in Gall-Bladder
— 
 
Dampness in Liver
— 
 
Dampness in Kidneys
• 
 
Chronic Dampness in Channels
• 
 
Internal Dampness in Skin
Acute
• 
 
Damp-Heat at Qi Level
External Dampness
There are three possible types of invasions of external Dampness:
 
1. 
 
A ‘simple’ invasion of Dampness in the Internal
Organs, which may affect the Bladder, Stomach,
Intestines, Uterus and Gall-Bladder
2. 
 
An invasion of Dampness in the channels causing
Painful Obstruction Syndrome in its acute stage
3. 
 
An invasion of Damp-Heat of the 
Wen Bing
 
type at
2179
the Defensive-Qi (
Wei
 
) level, manifesting with fever.
‘Simple’ invasion of external Dampness in Internal
Organs
Invasion of external Dampness in Bladder
Difficulty and pain on urination, scanty but frequent urination,
cloudy urine, a feeling of heaviness in the lower abdomen, tongue
with a thick sticky coating on the root, pulse perhaps Slippery on
the left Rear position.
If associated with Heat: burning pain on urination, dark urine,
thirst but no desire to drink, yellow tongue coating and a slightly
rapid pulse.
Invasion of external Dampness in the Stomach
Acute onset of vomiting/watery diarrhoea without smell, epigastric
pain, a feeling of stuffiness of the epigastrium, cold limbs, no
appetite, thick, sticky white tongue coating, Slippery or Soggy
pulse.
Invasion of external Dampness in Intestines
Acute onset of watery diarrhoea, without smell, abdominal pain, a
feeling of heaviness, tongue with a sticky, thick white coating,
pulse Slippery.
Invasion of external Dampness in Uterus
Acute onset of painful periods (as a one-off when periods were not
previously painful), excessive vaginal discharge, thick, sticky white
tongue coating on the root, Slippery pulse.
Invasion of external Dampness in Gall-Bladder
Acute onset of hypochondrial pain, a feeling of heaviness, bitter
taste, tongue with a sticky yellow coating on one side, Slippery
pulse.
2180
Invasion of acute, external Dampness in channels
This is, of course, an acute stage of Painful Obstruction Syndrome.
When one joint only is affected, this is usually Cold-Dampness;
when several joints are affected it is often due to Damp-Heat.
Invasion of acute, external Damp-Heat at the
Defensive-Qi level
This can be external Damp-Heat or Summer-Heat mixed with
Dampness.
External Damp-Heat at Defensive-Qi level
Shivers, fever, the body feels hot to touch, swollen glands, fever
higher in the afternoon, headache as if wrapped, a feeling of
oppression of the chest and epigastrium, a sticky taste, no thirst,
tongue with a sticky white coating (it is white because it is in the
beginning stage), Soggy pulse.
External Summer-Heat with Dampness
Fever, slight aversion to cold, no sweating, headache, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, an uncomfortable sensation of the
epigastrium, irritability, thirst, tongue body Red with a sticky
coating, Weak-Floating and Rapid pulse.
Internal Dampness
Interior Dampness arises from a deficiency of the Spleen and
sometimes the Kidneys. If the Spleen’s function of transformation
and transportation of Body Fluids fails, these will not be
transformed and will accumulate to form Dampness.
There are two possible types of internal Dampness: one chronic,
the other acute. Chronic internal Dampness may involve the
Internal Organs, the channels or the skin. Acute internal
Dampness involves Damp-Heat at the Qi Level within the 4-Level
Identification of Patterns.
Chronic Dampness
Chronic Dampness derives either from acute invasion of external
2181
Dampness or from dietary causes.
Chronic Dampness in the Internal Organs
The clinical manifestations of chronic, internal Dampness in the
Internal Organs have been described in the chapters on the
identification of patterns according to Internal Organs (
Chapters
91
 
–
100
 
).
Chronic Dampness in the channels
Chronic retention of Dampness in the channels and joints is, of
course, the main cause of Painful Obstruction Syndrome. This
manifests with pain, swelling and heaviness of the joints.
Chronic Dampness in the skin
Chronic retention of Dampness in the skin is the main cause of
numerous skin diseases, chiefly eczema (atopic or not). Dampness
in the skin manifests with vesicles or with skin lesions oozing
fluid, and with puffiness of the skin.
Acute Dampness
This is the Qi level of the identification of patterns according to
the Four Levels which is described in 
Chapter 104
 
.
DRYNESS
Dryness is a Yang pathogenic factor and it tends to injure Blood or
Yin. It arises in very dry weather, but it 
can also occur in some
artificial conditions such as in very dry, centrally heated buildings.
External Dryness
The clinical manifestations of external Dryness are simply
characterized by dryness and they are a dry throat, dry lips, a dry
tongue, a dry mouth, dry skin, dry stools and scanty urination.
Internal Dryness
2182
Internal Dryness arises from deficiency of Yin, particularly of the
Stomach or Kidneys, or both, and the symptoms are the same as
for exterior Dryness. Interior Dryness is not always the result of
Yin deficiency: it may sometimes be the stage preceding it. There
is a saying: 
‘Withering and cracking is due to Dryness.’
 
4
 
This
describes the dry skin and cracked tongue often seen in Dryness.
The Stomach is the origin of fluids and if one has an irregular
diet, such as eating late at night, eating in a hurry or going back to
work straight after eating, the Stomach fluids are depleted and this
leads to a state of Dryness which is the precursor of Yin deficiency.
This Dryness is manifested with a dry throat and mouth and a
dry tongue, possibly slightly Peeled in the centre, but not yet Red.
Box 103.10
 
summarizes the manifestations of Dryness.
 
BOX 103.10
 
   
 
DRYNESS
• 
 
Dry throat
• 
 
Dry lips
• 
 
Dry tongue
• 
 
Dry mouth
• 
 
Dry skin
• 
 
Dry stools
• 
 
Scanty urination
FIRE
Fire is an extreme form of Heat which can derive from any of the
other exterior pathogenic factors. Strictly speaking, it is not really
an exterior pathogenic factor. It either arises from the Interior or
derives from other exterior pathogenic factors, but once it
manifests in the body it is an interior pathogenic factor.
Heat and Fire are the same in nature but they differ in many
respects. Fire is more ‘solid’ than Heat, it tends to move and dry
out more than Heat. Heat can cause pain as well as all the other
symptoms of Heat, such as a Red tongue, thirst and a Rapid pulse,
but Fire moves upwards (causing mouth ulcers, for example) or
damages the blood vessels (causing bleeding). Also, Fire tends to
2183
affect the mind more than Heat causing anxiety, mental agitation,
insomnia or mental illness.
The differentiation between the Bright-Yang channel pattern and
the Bright-Yang organ pattern of the Six Stages pattern
identification illustrates the difference between Heat and Fire well;
as does that between the Stomach-Heat pattern and the Intestines
Dry-Heat pattern within the Four-Levels pattern identification.
The nature of Fire therefore is to rise to the head, to dry fluids,
to injure Blood and Yin, to deplete Qi and to affect the Mind.
Box 103.11
 
summarizes the characteristics of Fire.
 
BOX 103.11
 
   
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF
FIRE
• 
 
More intense than Heat (bitter taste, intense thirst)
• 
 
Dries up fluids (dark urine, constipation, dry tongue
coating)
• 
 
May cause bleeding (haemoptysis, haematemesis)
• 
 
Moves upwards (red eyes, mouth ulcers)
• 
 
Affects the Mind (agitation, insomnia, restlessness)
Fire can be of the Excess (Full) or Deficient (Empty) type. The
clinical manifestations of Full-Fire are a constant feeling of heat, a
red face and eyes, a constantly dry mouth, a bitter taste,
constipation, scanty dark urine, intense thirst, mental agitation, a
Red tongue with yellow coating and a Full-Deep-Rapid pulse.
When Fire enters the Blood, it may give rise to dark purple spots
under the skin (macules) and vomiting of blood or other
haemorrhages.
Empty-Fire arises from deficiency of Yin and is manifested with
night sweating, a feeling of heat in the chest, palms and soles, red
cheekbones, a dry mouth, thirst in the evening or night, a feeling
of heat in the evening, a Red and peeled tongue and a Floating-
Empty and Rapid pulse.
Table 103.4
 
differentiates Full- from Empty-Fire.
2184
Table 103.4
Differentiation between Full- and Empty-Fire
 
Full-Fire
Empty-Fire
Feeling of heat
All the time
In the evening
Thirst
Intense, all the time
In the evening and night
Dry mouth
All the time
At night
Bitter taste
Yes
No
Mind
Intense agitation
Vague, mild restlessness in the evening
Tongue
Red with dry dark-yellow coating
Red without coating
Pulse
Full-Deep-Rapid
Floating-Empty, Rapid
Fire (Full or Empty) can affect the Heart, Liver, Stomach,
Kidneys, Lungs and Intestines; its clinical 
manifestations related
to each of these organs have been described in detail in the
chapters on the identification of patterns according to the Internal
Organs (
Chapters 91
 
–
100
 
).
NOTES
1. 
Yi, Zhai Ming. Clinical Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Lin
Chuang Ji Chu
 
 
). Henan Publishing House, 1979;
132.
2. 
Yi, Zhai Ming. Clinical Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Lin
Chuang Ji Chu
 
 
). Henan Publishing House, 1979;
133.
3. 
Yi, Zhai Ming. Clinical Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Lin
Chuang Ji Chu
 
 
). Henan Publishing House, 1979;
133.
4. 
Yi, Zhai Ming. Clinical Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Lin
Chuang Ji Chu
 
 
). Henan Publishing House, 1979;
133.
2185
CHAPTER
104
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE FOUR LEVELS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
DEFENSIVE-QI LEVEL
Wind-Heat
Summer-Heat
Damp-Heat
Dry-Heat
QI LEVEL
Lung-Heat (Heat in chest and diaphragm)
Stomach-Heat
Intestines Dry-Heat (Fire)
2186
Gall-Bladder Heat
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
NUTRITIVE-QI LEVEL
Heat in Nutritive-Qi level
Heat in the Pericardium
BLOOD LEVEL
Heat victorious agitates Blood
Heat victorious stirring Wind
Empty-Wind agitating in the Interior
Collapse of Yin
Collapse of Yang
The Four Levels in a nutshell
LATENT HEAT
Lesser-Yang type
Bright-Yang type
Lesser-Yin type
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES AND
THREE BURNERS
INTRODUCTION
The identification of patterns according to the Four Levels was
devised by Ye Tian Shi in his book ‘A Study of Warm Diseases’
(
Wen Bing Xue
 
, 1746). The identification of patterns according to
the Four Levels is clinically the most useful tool to interpret the
pathology and establish the treatment of infectious diseases
deriving from invasion of Wind-Heat. Examples of ‘Warm Diseases’
are influenza, measles, German measles, chickenpox,
mononucleosis, mumps, severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) and meningitis. However, this method of identification of
2187
patterns can be used to diagnose and treat any invasion of Wind-
Heat and its consequences, whether it is a ‘Warm Disease’ or not.
For example, if a patient suffers an acute respiratory infection from
invasion of Wind-Heat and subsequently develops a chest
infection, the identification of patterns according to the Four
Levels provides the perfect tool to diagnose and treat this
problem. In this particular example, the initial stage of the acute
respiratory infection corresponds to invasion of Wind-Heat at the
Defensive-Qi level; when the disease progresses and the patient
suffers from a chest infection, this corresponds to internal Heat at
the Qi level and specifically the pattern of Phlegm-Heat in the
Lungs.
Many warm diseases often manifest with a rash; examples of
exanthematous (i.e. manifesting with rash) diseases are measles,
German measles and chickenpox. One must distinguish between
vesicles
 
, 
papules
 
and 
macules
 
(see 
Table 104.6
 
). 
Vesicles
 
are
blister-like spots filled with a clear fluid and they always indicate
Dampness. 
Papules
 
are red, solid spots; they generally indicate
Heat at the Qi Level (and especially in the Lungs and Stomach).
Macules
 
are spots under the 
skin which, unlike vesicles and
papules, cannot be felt on palpation; they always indicate Heat at
the Nutritive-Qi or Blood level.
Table 104.6
Comparison of papules, vesicles and macules
2188
DEFENSIVE-QI LEVEL
Wind-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Fever, aversion to cold, severe deep headache, sore throat, cough,
slight sweating, slight shivers, runny nose with yellow discharge,
swollen tonsils, slight body aches, slightly dark urine, slight thirst.
Tongue
 
Red in the front or sides with a thin white coating. The
tongue coating is white because the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior.
Pulse
 
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-14 Dazhui, BL-12
Fengmen (with cupping), LU-11 Shaoshang.
Prescription
Yin Qiao San 
Lonicera-Forsythia Decoction
Sang Ju Yin 
Morus-Chrysanthemum Decoction
 
.
Table 104.1
 
compares the manifestations of Wind-Heat with
those of Wind-Cold (Six Stages).
2189
Table 104.1
Comparison of invasion of Wind-Cold (Six Stages) and invasion
of Wind-Heat (Four Levels)
 
Wind-Cold (Six Stages)
Wind-Heat (Four Levels)
Pathology
Wind-Cold on Exterior obstructing Defensive Qi
Wind-Heat injuring Defensive Qi
and impairing descending of Lung-
Qi
Penetration
route
Through skin
Through nose and mouth
Fever
Slight or absent
Higher
Shivers
Severe
Slight
Aches
Severe (in prevalence of Cold)
Slight
Headache
Occipital
Deep inside, severe
Sweating
No sweating in prevalence of Cold; sweating
only on top part of body in prevalence of Wind
Slight sweating
Thirst
No
Slight
Urine
Clear
Slightly dark
Tongue
Body-colour normal, thin white coating
Red sides/front, thin white coating
Pulse
Floating-Tight in prevalence of Cold; Floating-
Slow in prevalence of Wind
Floating-Rapid
Treatment
Pungent-warm herbs to cause sweating
Pungent-cool herbs to release the
Exterior
Summer-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Fever, aversion to cold, absence of sweating, headache, a feeling of
heaviness, an uncomfortable sensation in the epigastrium,
irritability, thirst.
Tongue
 
Red in the front or sides with a sticky white coating. The
tongue coating is white because the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior.
Pulse
 
Soggy and Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-14 Dazhui, P-9
Zhongchong.
Prescription
Qing Luo Yin 
Clearing the Connecting Channels Decoction
 
.
2190
Damp-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Fever that is worse in the afternoon, body hot to the touch,
aversion to cold, swollen glands, headache, a feeling of heaviness,
a feeling of oppression of the epigastrium, sticky taste, thirst with
no desire to drink.
Tongue
 
Sticky white coating. The tongue coating is white because
the pathogenic factor is on the Exterior.
Pulse
 
Soggy-Slow. The pulse is Slow because of the influence of
Dampness.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-12
Zhongwan.
Prescription
Huo Xiang Zheng Qi San 
Agastache Upright Qi Powder
 
.
Dry-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Fever, slight aversion to cold, shivers, slight sweating, dry skin,
nose, mouth and throat, dry cough, sore throat.
Tongue
 
Dry with thin white coating. The tongue coating is white
because the pathogenic factor is on the Exterior.
Pulse
 
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-5 Waiguan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LU-9
Taiyuan, ST-36 Zusanli.
Prescription
Xing Su San 
Prunus-Perilla Powder
Sang Xing Tang 
Morus-Prunus Decoction
 
.
2191
QI LEVEL
Lung-Heat (Heat In Chest And Diaphragm)
Clinical manifestations
High fever, a feeling of heat, absence of aversion to cold, thirst,
cough with thin yellow sputum, shortness of breath, sweating.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-10 Yuji, Du-14 Dazhui, LI-11 Quchi, LU-1 Zhongfu,
BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Ma Xing Shi Gan Tang 
Ephedra-Prunus-Gypsum-Glycyrrhiza
Decoction
Xie Bai San 
Draining the White Powder
Qing Qi Hua Tan Tang 
Clearing Qi and Resolving Phlegm Decoction
(if there is also Phlegm)
Wu Hu Tang 
Five Tigers Decoction
 
.
Stomach-Heat
Clinical manifestations
High fever that is worse in the afternoon, absence of aversion to
cold, a feeling of heat, intense thirst, profuse sweating.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-43 Xiangu, LI-11
Quchi, ST-25 Tianshu.
Prescription
Bai Hu Tang 
White Tiger Decoction
 
.
2192
Intestines Dry-Heat (Fire)
Clinical manifestations
High fever that is higher in the afternoon, constipation, dry stools,
burning in the anus, abdominal fullness and pain, irritability,
delirium.
Tongue
 
Red with thick dry-yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Full-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, ST-25 Tianshu, SP-15 Daheng, ST-37 Shangjuxu, ST-39
Xiajuxu.
Prescription
Tiao Wei Cheng Qi Tang 
Regulating the Stomach Conducting Qi
Decoction
 
.
Table 104.2
 
compares Stomach-Heat with Intestines Dry-Heat
(Fire) within the Qi Level. (The characteristics of Fire were covered
in 
Chapter 103
 
.)
Table 104.2
Comparison of Heat and Fire at the Qi level
2193
Gall-Bladder Heat
Clinical manifestations
Alternating hot and cold feeling with a prevalence of heat, bitter
taste, thirst, dry throat, hypochondrial pain, nausea, a feeling of
fullness in the epigastrium.
Tongue
 
Red with unilateral sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
GB-34 Yanglingquan, GB-43 Xiaxi, TB-6 Zhigou, TB-5 Waiguan.
Prescription
Hao Qin Qing Dan Tang 
Artemisia-Scutellaria Clearing the Gall-
Bladder Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In Stomach And Spleen
Clinical manifestations
Continuous fever which decreases after sweating but soon
increases again, a feeling of heaviness of the body and head, a
feeling of oppression of the chest and epigastrium, nausea, loose
stools.
Tongue
 
Red with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Soggy-Rapid.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-9
Shuifen, ST-36 Zusanli, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
Table 104.3
 
compares the Defensive-Qi level with the Qi level.
2194
Table 104.3
Comparison of Defensive-Qi and Qi levels in identification of
patterns according to the Four Levels
NUTRITIVE-QI LEVEL
Heat In Nutritive-Qi Level
Clinical manifestations
Fever at night, dry mouth with no desire to drink, mental
restlessness, insomnia, delirium, incoherent speech or aphasia,
macules.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
P-9 Zhongchong, P-8 Laogong, HE-9 Shaochong, KI-6 Zhaohai.
Prescription
Qing Ying Tang 
Clearing the Nutritive-Qi [Heat] Decoction
 
.
Heat In The Pericardium
Clinical manifestations
Fever at night, mental confusion, incoherent speech or aphasia,
delirium, body heat, but hands and feet cold, macules.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
2195
P-9 Zhongchong, P-8 Laogong, HE-9 Shaochong, KI-6 Zhaohai.
Prescription
Qing Ying Tang 
Clearing the Nutritive-Qi [Heat] Decoction
 
.
BLOOD LEVEL
Heat Victorious Agitates Blood
Clinical manifestations
High fever, irritability, manic behaviour, dark macules, vomiting of
blood, epistaxis, blood in stools, blood in urine.
Tongue
 
Dark-Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-10 Xuehai, LI-11 Quchi, LIV-2 Xingjian, KI-6 Zhaohai, HE-9
Shaochong.
Prescription
Xi Jiao Di Huang Tang 
Cornus Rhinoceri-Rehmannia Decoction
 
.
Heat Victorious Stirring Wind
Clinical manifestations
High fever, fainting, twitching of the limbs, convulsions, rigidity of
the neck, opisthotonos, eyeballs turning up, clenching of the teeth.
Tongue
 
Dark-Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-10 Xuehai, LI-11 Quchi, LIV-2 Xingjian, KI-6 Zhaohai, HE-9
Shaochong, LIV-3 Taichong, Du-16 Fengfu, GB-20 Fengchi, SI-3
Houxi and BL-62 Shenmai in combination.
Prescription
2196
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
 
.
Empty-Wind Agitating In The Interior
Clinical manifestations
Low-grade fever, tremor of the limbs, twitching, loss of weight,
malar flush, listlessness.
Tongue
 
Dark-Red and dry without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, Du-16 Fengfu, GB-20 Fengchi, SI-3 Houxi and BL-
62 Shenmai in combination, LIV-8 Ququan, KI-6 Zhaohai, KI-3
Taixi, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Zhen Gan Xi Feng Tang 
Pacifying the Liver and Extinguishing Wind
Decoction
 
.
Collapse Of Yin
Clinical manifestations
Low-grade fever, night sweating, mental restlessness, dry mouth
with a desire to sip liquids, five-palm heat, malar flush,
emaciation.
Tongue
 
Dark-Red and Dry without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, KI-3 Taixi, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-6 Zhaohai, Ren-4
Guanyuan.
Prescription
Da Bu Yin Wan 
Great Tonifying the Yin Pill
 
.
Collapse Of Yang
2197
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of cold, cold limbs, bright-white complexion, profuse
sweating on the forehead, listlessness.
Tongue
 
Pale-Swollen and Short.
Pulse
 
Hidden, Slow, Scattered.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-8 Shenque. Moxa
is applicable.
Prescription
Shen Fu Tang 
Ginseng-Aconitum Decoction
 
.
THE FOUR LEVELS IN A NUTSHELL
Table 104.4
 
compares the clinical manifestations of the Four
Levels, and 
Table 104.5
 
compares the tongue manifestations. 
Table
104.6
 
compares and differentiates papules, macules and vesicles.
The presence of papules indicates Heat at the Qi level, whereas
macules indicate that it is at the Nutritive-Qi or Blood level.
Table 104.4
Comparison of the clinical manifestations of the Four Levels
2198
Table 104.5
Comparison of tongue appearance in the Four Levels
Box 104.1
 
summarizes the essential features of each level.
 
BOX 104.1
 
   
 
THE FOUR LEVELS IN A
NUTSHELL
• 
 
Defensive-Qi level: shivers and slight fever
• 
 
Qi level: no shivers, high fever, feeling of heat
• 
 
Nutritive-Qi level: mental changes, fever at night
• 
 
Blood level: fever at night, bleeding, internal Wind
LATENT HEAT
The concept of Latent Heat is very old in Chinese medicine, having
been mentioned in the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine’ for the first 
time. Latent Heat occurs when an external
pathogenic factor such as Cold penetrates the body without
causing apparent symptoms at the time; the pathogenic factor
instead penetrates in the Interior and ‘incubates’ there turning
into interior Heat. This Heat later emerges with acute symptoms of
Heat; when it emerges, it is called ‘Latent Heat’.
The reason that an external pathogenic factor invades the body
without acute symptoms is usually to be found in a Kidney
deficiency; thus, the development of Latent Heat indicates a pre-
existing Kidney deficiency which induces a weakened immune
response to the invasion of an external pathogenic factor.
The main clinical manifestations of the emergence of Latent
2199
Heat are listed in 
Box 104.2
 
.
 
BOX 104.2
 
   
 
LATENT HEAT
• 
 
Acute onset
• 
 
Thirst
• 
 
Irritability
• 
 
Insomnia
• 
 
Sudden tiredness and lassitude
• 
 
Weary limbs
• 
 
Dark urine
• 
 
Red tongue
• 
 
Rapid pulse
Other symptoms and signs vary according to the type of Latent
Heat and these are described below. 
Figure 104.1
 
illustrates the
concept of Latent Heat from the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of
Internal Medicine’ and 
Figure 104.2
 
compares and contrasts the
movement of the pathogenic factor in an invasion of Wind-Heat
with the movement of Latent Heat. 
Figures 104.3
 
and 
104.4
illustrate the types of Latent Heat and patterns developing from it.
FIG. 104.1
 
Development of Latent Heat according to the ‘Yellow
Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’
2200
FIG. 104.2
 
Diagram of movement of pathogenic factor in invasion
of Wind-Heat compared with Latent Heat
2201
FIG. 104.3
 
Types of Latent Heat
FIG. 104.4
 
Full and Empty types of Latent Heat
Table 104.7
 
compares the clinical manifestations of Wind-Heat
and Latent Heat.
Table 104.7
Comparison of invasion of Wind-Heat and Latent Heat
 
Wind-Heat
Latent Heat
Symptoms
Shivers, aversion to cold,
sweating, fever
No shivers, no aversion to cold (unless combined with
new infection)
Cough
Cough
No cough
Pulse
Floating-Rapid
Fire-Rapid, also Wiry, Deep-full or Intermittent
Tongue
Thin white coating
Red or Deep-Red tongue from the beginning, with
yellow or dry brown coating or no coating
Pathology
Easy to have abnormal
transmission to Pericardium
Easy to consume Yin and dry up fluids
Latent Heat can manifest at the Qi or Blood level. There are
three main patterns, two at the Qi level and one at the Blood level
as follows:
2202
Lesser-Yang Type
Alternation of chills and fever, bitter taste, hypochondrial pain,
red eyes, deafness, vomiting, a feeling ofoppression of the
diaphragm, Red tongue with unilateral yellow coating, Wiry pulse.
Bright-Yang Type
Channel pattern
A feeling of heat, thirst, sweating, fever, Big pulse.
Organ pattern
Fever, abdominal fullness and pain, constipation, Red tongue with
dry brown coating, Deep-Full pulse.
Lesser-Yin Type
A feeling of weariness of the limbs before the onset of other
symptoms, insomnia, irritability, dry mouth and throat, scanty
dark urination, headache, backache, tiredness, Red tongue, Rapid
pulse.
At Blood level
Delirium, faint feeling, dry limbs, dry mouth without a desire to
drink, sweating, irritability, macules, blood in urine, epistaxis,
Deep-Red tongue without coating, Fine-Rapid pulse.
At Yin level
Oily beads on forehead, dry mouth and teeth, irritability, delirium,
scanty urine, blood in urine, Deep-Red tongue without coating,
2203
Fine-Rapid pulse.
Figure 104.5
 
illustrates the pattern developing from Latent Heat
of the Lesser-Yin type.
FIG. 104.5
 
Patterns developing from Latent Heat in the Lesser Yin
Table 104.8
 
compares the manifestations of Latent Heat at the Qi
and Blood level.
Table 104.8
Comparison of Qi and Blood levels in Latent Heat
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE FOUR
LEVELS, SIX STAGES AND THREE
BURNERS
Although the identification of patterns according to the Six Stages
dates back to the Han dynasty and those according to the Four
Levels and Three Burners to the Qing dynasty, there are many
points of contact between the three methods. First of all, all three
describe the symptoms of invasion of external Wind when this is
on the Exterior in the beginning stages and when it is in the
Interior in later stages.
2204
The Greater-Yang stage of the Six Stages is similar to the
Defensive-Qi level within the Four Levels as they both deal with
invasions of external Wind: the former Wind-Cold and the latter
Wind-Heat. The Bright-Yang stage of the Six Stages is almost the
same as the Qi level of the Four Levels (Heat in Bright Yang and
Dry-Heat in the Stomach and Intestines patterns). The Lesser-Yang
stage of the Six Stages is almost the same as the Gall-Bladder Heat
at the Qi level, the former being characterized by the
predominance of Cold and the latter by that of Heat.
The identification of patterns according to the Three Burners is
quite similar to that according to the Four Levels (
Fig. 104.6
 
).
Many of the patterns are essentially the same as those of the Four
Levels, except that they are seen from the perspective of the Three
Burners, (i.e. patterns of the Upper Burner, Middle Burner and
Lower Burner). The Middle Burner patterns correspond to the Qi
Level, and those of the Lower Burner correspond to the Nutritive-
Qi and Blood levels. In contrast, the patterns of the Upper Burner
encompass the Defensive-Qi, Qi and Nutritive-Qi levels.
2205
FIG. 104.6
 
Connections between Three Burners and Four Levels
Comparing the Three Burners and the Six Stages methods, it is
apparent that the Upper Burner patterns correspond to the
Greater-Yang stage. The Middle Burner patterns encompass the
Bright-Yang, Lesser-Yang and Greater-Yin stages. The Lower
2206
Burner Patterns include those of the Lesser-Yin and Terminal-Yin
stages (
Fig. 104.7
 
).
FIG. 104.7
 
Connections between Six Stages and Three Burners
Further connections between the three methods of pattern
identification are shown in the diagrams in 
Figure 104.8
 
.
2207
2208
FIG. 104.8(A–D)
 
Connections between Six Stages, Four Levels and
Three Burners
2209
CHAPTER
105
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE SIX STAGES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
GREATER-YANG STAGE
Channel patterns
Organ patterns
BRIGHT-YANG STAGE
Bright-Yang channel pattern
Bright-Yang organ pattern
LESSER-YANG STAGE
GREATER-YIN STAGE
LESSER-YIN STAGE
Cold Transformation
Heat Transformation
2210
TERMINAL-YIN STAGE
GREATER-YANG STAGE
Channel Patterns
Invasion of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Cold (Attack
of Cold)
Clinical manifestations
Aversion to cold, slight fever shivers, absence of sweating, severe
headache, pronounced aching, stiff neck, sneezing, runny nose
with white discharge, slight breathlessness.
Tongue
 
Normal tongue-body colour with thin white coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Tight.
Acupuncture
BL-12 Fengmen with cupping, LU-7 Lieque, LI-4 Hegu. Moxa is
applicable.
Prescription
Ma Huang Tang 
Ephedra Decoction.
Invasion of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Wind (Attack
of Wind)
Clinical manifestations
Slight aversion to cold, aversion to wind, slight fever, slight
sweating, mild headache, slight aching, stiff neck, sneezing.
Tongue
 
Normal tongue-body colour with thin white coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Slow.
Acupuncture
BL-12 Fengmen with cupping, LU-7 Lieque, LI-4 Hegu, GB-20
Fengchi, ST-36 Zusanli.
2211
Prescription
Gui Zhi Tang 
Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
 
.
Table 105.1
 
differentiates the clinical manifestations of the
Attack of Cold from those of Attack of Wind.
Table 105.1
Comparison of Attack of Cold and Attack of Wind in the Greater-
Yang pattern
Invasion of Wind-Heat
Clinical manifestations
Aversion to cold, fever, slight shivers, sneezing, cough, runny nose
with slightly yellow mucus, occipital stiffness and ache, slight
sweating, itchy throat, sore throat, swollen tonsils, body aches,
slight thirst.
Tongue
 
Tongue-body colour slightly Red on the front/sides (not
in every case), thin white coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, LU-7 Lieque, BL-12 Fengmen, TB-5
Waiguan.
Prescription
Yin Qiao San 
Lonicera-Forsythia Powder
 
.
2212
Table 105.2
 
differentiates the clinical manifestations of invasion
of Wind-Cold (with prevalence of Wind), Wind-Cold (with
prevalence ofCold) and Wind-Heat.
Table 105.2
Comparison of invasion of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Wind,
invasion of Wind-Cold with prevalence of Cold, and invasion of
Wind-Heat
Organ Patterns
Accumulation of Water
Clinical manifestations
Shivers, fever, aversion to cold, retention of urine, slight thirst,
vomiting of fluids soon after drinking.
Pulse
 
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
Ren-9 Shuifen, Ren-3 Zhongji, LU-7 Lieque, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, BL-
39 Weiyang.
Prescription
Wu Ling San 
Five ‘Ling’ Powder
 
.
Accumulation of Blood
Clinical manifestations
Hypogastric distension, fullness and urgency, urinary
2213
incontinence, blood in the urine, mental restlessness.
Tongue
 
Reddish-Purple without coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
BL-62 Shenmai and SI-3 Houxi in combination, BL-39 Weiyang, SI-5
Yanggu, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu, SP-10 Xuehai, LIV-1 Dadun.
Prescription
Tao He Cheng Qi Tang 
Persica Conducting Qi Decoction
 
.
Table 105.3
 
compares the manifestations of Accumulation of
Water and Accumulation of Blood in the Greater-Yang organ
pattern of Heat in the Bladder.
Table 105.3
Comparison of Accumulation of Water and Accumulation of
Blood within the Greater-Yang organ pattern
 
Accumulation of Water
Accumulation of Blood
Pattern
Heat in the Bladder at Qi level
Heat in the Bladder at Blood level
Symptoms
Urinary retention, no mental
changes
Urinary incontinence, blood in the urine, mental
restlessness
BRIGHT-YANG STAGE
Bright-Yang Channel Pattern
Clinical manifestations
High fever, profuse sweating, intense thirst, red face, a feeling of
heat, irritability, delirium.
Tongue
 
Red with thin yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, Du-14 Dazhui, P-3 Quze, ST-44 Neiting, ST-43 Xiangu.
Prescription
2214
Bai Hu Tang 
White Tiger Decoction
 
.
Bright-Yang Organ Pattern
Clinical manifestations
High fever that is worse in the afternoon, profuse sweating, a
feeling of heat, sweating on limbs, abdominal fullness/pain,
constipation, dry stools, thirst, dark urine.
Tongue
 
Red with thick, dry yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Full-Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, Du-14 Dazhui, P-3 Quze, ST-44 Neiting, ST-43 Xiangu,
ST-25 Tianshu, SP-15 Daheng, ST-37 Shangjuxu, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Tiao Wei Cheng Qi Tang 
Regulating the Stomach Conducting Qi
Decoction
 
.
Table 105.4
 
compares the clinical manifestations of the Bright-
Yang channel pattern with those of the Bright-Yang organ pattern.
2215
Table 105.4
Differences between channel and organ patterns in Bright-Yang
pattern of the Six Stages
LESSER-YANG STAGE
Clinical manifestations
Alternations of shivers and fever, bitter taste, dry throat, blurred
vision, hypochondrial fullness and distension, lack of desire to eat
or drink, irritability, nausea, vomiting.
Tongue
 
Unilateral thin white coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Fine.
Acupuncture
TB-5 Waiguan, TB-6 Zhigou, GB-41 Zulinqi, Du-13 Taodao.
Prescription
Xiao Chai Hu Tang 
Small Bupleurum Decoction
 
.
GREATER-YIN STAGE
2216
Clinical manifestations
Abdominal fullness, a feeling of cold, vomiting, lack of appetite,
diarrhoea, absence of thirst, tiredness.
Tongue
 
Pale with sticky white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Slow.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, BL-20 Pishu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-9 Yinlingquan.
Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Li Zhong Tang 
Regulating the Centre Decoction
 
.
Table 105.5
Comparison of Lesser-Yin Cold transformation with Heat
transformation
LESSER-YIN STAGE
Cold Transformation
Clinical manifestations
Chills, a feeling of cold, lying with the body curled, listlessness, a
desire to sleep, cold limbs, diarrhoea, absence of thirst, frequent
pale urination.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet with white coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Weak-Slow.
2217
Acupuncture
BL-23 Shenshu, Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, Ren-8 Shenque, KI-7
Fuliu, KI-3 Taixi. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Si Ni Tang 
Four Rebellious Decoction
 
.
Heat Transformation
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of heat, irritability, insomnia, dry mouth and throat at
night, dark urine, night sweating.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
Ren-4 Guanyuan, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, SP-6
Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Huang Lian E Jiao Tang 
Coptis-Colla Asini Decoction
 
.
TERMINAL-YIN STAGE
Clinical manifestations
Persistent thirst, a feeling of energy rising to the chest, pain and a
sensation of heat in the heart region, hunger but no desire to eat,
cold limbs, diarrhoea, vomiting, vomiting of roundworms.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, LI-4 Hegu, SP-4 Gongsun, P-6 Neiguan.
Prescription
Wu Mei Wan 
Prunus Mume Decoction
 
.
2218
CHAPTER
106
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE THREE
BURNERS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
UPPER BURNER
Wind-Heat in the Lung Defensive-Qi portion
Heat in the Lungs (Qi level)
Heat in the Pericardium (Nutritive-Qi level)
MIDDLE BURNER
Heat in Bright Yang
Damp-Heat in the Spleen
LOWER BURNER
2219
Heat in the Kidneys
Liver-Heat stirs Wind
Liver Empty-Wind
UPPER BURNER
Wind-Heat In The Lung Defensive-Qi
Portion
Clinical manifestations
Fever, shivers, aversion to cold, headache, sore throat, slight
sweating, runny nose with yellow discharge, swollen tonsils, body
aches, slight thirst.
Tongue
 
Red in the front or sides with a thin white coating. The
tongue coating is white because the pathogenic factor is on the
Exterior.
Pulse
 
Floating-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-4 Hegu, LI-11 Quchi, TB-5 Waiguan, Du-14 Dazhui, BL-12
Fengmen (with cupping), LU-11 Shaoshang.
Prescription
Yin Qiao San 
Honeysuckle and Forsythia Powder
Sang Ju Yin 
Mulberry Leaf and Chrysanthemum Decoction.
Heat In The Lungs (Qi Level)
Clinical manifestations
Fever, sweating, cough, breathlessness, thirst, a feeling of
oppression and pain in the chest.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Overflowing.
2220
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-10 Yuji, LU-1 Zhongfu, LI-11 Quchi, BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Ma Xing Shi Gan Tang 
Ephedra-Prunus-Gypsum-Glycyrrhiza
Decoction
Wu Hu Tang 
Five Tigers Decoetion
Xie Bai San 
Expelling Whiteness Powder
Qing Qi Hua Tan Tang (if there is also Phlegm) 
Clearing Qi-
Resolving Phlegm Decoction
 
.
Heat In The Pericardium (Nutritive-Qi Level)
Clinical manifestations
High fever at night, a burning sensation in the epigastrium, cold
limbs, delirium, aphasia.
Tongue
 
Deep-Red and Stiff body without coating.
Pulse
 
Fine and Rapid.
Acupuncture
P-9 Zhongchong, P-3 Quze, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Qing Ying Tang 
Clearing Nutritive-Qi Decoction
 
.
MIDDLE BURNER
Heat In Bright Yang
Clinical manifestations
High fever that is worse in the afternoon, no aversion to cold, a
feeling of heat, intense thirst, profuse sweating.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Overflowing-Rapid.
Acupuncture
2221
ST-44 Neiting, ST-34 Liangqiu, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-43 Xiangu, LI-11
Quchi, ST-25 Tianshu.
Prescription
Bai Hu Tang 
White Tiger Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Spleen
Clinical manifestations
Fever, epigastric fullness, a feeling of heaviness of the body and
head, nausea, vomiting.
Tongue
 
Red with sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Soggy and Rapid.
Acupuncture
SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-9
Shuifen, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu.
Prescription
Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
LOWER BURNER
Heat In The Kidneys
Clinical manifestations
Fever in the afternoon and evening, five-palm heat, dry mouth and
throat, night sweating, deafness, lassitude.
Tongue
 
Deep-Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty and Rapid.
Acupuncture
KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-2 Rangu, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Xi Jiao Di Huang Tang 
Cornu Rhinoceri-Rehmannia Decoction
 
.
2222
Liver-Heat Stirs Wind
Clinical manifestations
High fever at night, coma, convulsions, clenched teeth.
Tongue
 
Deep-Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-2 Xingjian, GB-20 Fengchi, Du-16 Fengfu, SI-3
Houxi and BL-62 Shenmai in combination.
Prescription
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction.
Liver Empty-Wind
Clinical manifestations
Low-grade fever, cold limbs, dry and black teeth, dry and cracked
lips, convulsions, tremor of the limbs.
Tongue
 
Deep-Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Deep-Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LIV-3 Taichong, LIV-2 Xingjian, GB-20 Fengchi, Du-16 Fengfu, SI-3
Houxi and BL-62 Shenmai in combination, KI-3 Taixi, KI-6 Zhaohai,
SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Zhen Gan Xi Feng Tang 
Pacifying the Liver and Extinguishing Wind
Decoction
San Jia Fu Mai Tang 
Three Carapaces Restoring the Pulse Decoction
Da Ding Feng Zhu 
Big Stopping Wind Pearl
 
.
2223
CHAPTER
107
 
RESIDUAL
PATHOGENIC
FACTOR
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
FORMATION OF RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC
FACTOR
How is it diagnosed?
Types of residual pathogenic factor
Effects of residual pathogenic factor
Treatment of residual pathogenic factor
PHLEGM
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs
DAMPNESS
Dampness in the Stomach and Spleen
2224
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder
Damp-Heat in the ears
Damp-Heat in the head
HEAT
Heat in the Lungs
Heat in the Lungs with Dryness
Heat in the Stomach
Toxic Heat in the tonsils
LESSER-YANG PATTERN
Lesser-Yang pattern (Six Stages)
Heat in the Gall-Bladder (Four Levels)
INTRODUCTION
A residual pathogenic factor is a pathogenic factor that is left over
following an invasion or repeated invasions of Wind. I use ‘Wind’
here in a general sense to designate an external pathogenic factor,
which may be Wind-Cold, Wind-Heat, Wind-Dryness, Heat,
Dampness, Damp-Heat, Summer-Heat, or indeed any type of
exterior pathogenic factor.
After an invasion of a pathogenic factor, the pathological
development can have three possible outcomes:
 
• 
 
it may be expelled completely and the patient
recovers
• 
 
it may become interior (at the Qi level of the Four
levels)
• 
 
it may appear to have been expelled, and the patient
appears to recover, but actually a residual pathogenic
factor has been formed.
2225
A residual pathogenic factor can also be formed after an exterior
pathogenic factor has become interior (see 
Figure 107.1
 
).
FIG. 107.1
 
Development of residual interior pathogenic factor from
exterior pathogenic factor
Thus, a residual pathogenic factor is simply a left-over
pathological product when the patient 
appears
 
to recover after an
acute invasion of an exterior agent.
FORMATION OF RESIDUAL
PATHOGENIC FACTOR
A residual pathogenic factor is formed in two ways: first, as
described above, the original exterior pathogenic factor is not
cleared and residual pathogenic factor either forms directly in the
Exterior or when the 
pathogenic factor penetrates the Interior (
Fig.
107.1
 
); secondly, an exterior pathogenic factor, whether at the
exterior or interior level, always disrupts the ascending of Spleen-
Qi and descending of Stomach-Qi thus leading to the formation of
Dampness or Phlegm (
Fig. 107.2
 
).
2226
FIG. 107.2
 
Formation of a residual pathogenic factor leading to
Dampness or Phlegm
Why is a residual pathogenic factor formed? Usually, the main
reason is simply not taking care of oneself during an acute illness.
Unfortunately, most people in the West have lost any idea of
common sense or wisdom in looking after themselves. During an
acute febrile illness, one should stop working and rest as much as
possible: this is the best way to avoid a possible development of a
residual pathogenic factor. Most people, however, simply go on
working (or even overworking) as usual so that the body’s Upright
Qi (or immune system, from a Western point of view) cannot fight
the pathogenic factor adequately and a residual pathogenic factor
develops. Such a history is extremely common in patients suffering
from ME: nearly all adults suffering from this condition report that
it started after a severe infection during which they went on
working (or overworking) as before.
Another frequent reason for the development of a residual
pathogenic factor is the use, or rather inappropriate use, of
antibiotics. From a Chinese perspective, antibiotics kill bacteria
but they do not clear Heat and, most importantly, do not resolve
Dampness or Phlegm. On the contrary, they often upset the
digestive system and therefore contribute to forming Dampness or
Phlegm. The use of antibiotics is especially inappropriate for viral
infections as these agents are not effective against viruses; in spite
of this, they are still used frequently for infections that are clearly
viral. It is estimated that in previously normal adults without
2227
underlying lung disease (i.e. not suffering from chronic
bronchitis), up to 95% of acute episodes of lower-respiratory tract
infections are caused by viral infection.
 
1
 
A meta-analysis of
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of the efficacy
of antibiotics in previously healthy adults with acute bronchitis
found no differences between antibiotic- 
and placebo-treated
groups in patient- or physician-reported symptoms, resolution of
cough or fever, or return to work.
 
2
Residual pathogenic factors are particularly common in children
because their digestive system is still immature and easily upset,
and invasions of Wind nearly always cause the formation of
Dampness or Phlegm. In my experience it would not be an
exaggeration to say that more than half of children’s problems are
due to retention of residual pathogenic factors. 
Box 107.1
 
lists
conditions in children that are frequently due to retention of
residual pathogenic factors.
 
BOX 107.1
 
   
 
CHILDREN’S ILLNESSES
OFTEN DUE TO RETENTION OF
RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
• 
 
Chronic earache, recurrent ear infections
• 
 
Chronic tonsillitis, swollen tonsils
• 
 
Chronic catarrh
• 
 
Chronic lymphatic congestion
• 
 
Chronic sinusitis
• 
 
Recurrent mouth ulcers
• 
 
Insomnia, restless sleep, crying at night
As children grow up, the manifestations and effects of a residual
pathogenic factor may become less obvious; often, this does not
mean that the residual pathogenic factor has been cleared but the
Qi has got stronger. In fact, Qi and the residual pathogenic factor
are like two plates of a scale: when one goes down, the other goes
up and vice versa (
Fig. 107.3
 
).
2228
FIG. 107.3
 
Relationship between Upright Qi and residual
pathogenic factor
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF
RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
How Is It Diagnosed?
The diagnosis of a residual pathogenic factor is made on the basis
of the history and symptoms. Patients report a history of an acute
febrile episode from which they appeared to recover but which left
them with a chronic problem such as a cough, earache, sinusitis,
catarrh, etc.
As for symptomatology, the most common forms of residual
pathogenic factor are Damp-Heat and Phlegm-Heat and there will
therefore be some signs of Heat and Dampness or Phlegm.
Symptoms of Heat will include thirst, a feeling of heat, irritability,
insomnia and dark urine. The tongue will have a sticky yellow
coating and the pulse will be slightly Rapid. 
Figure 107.4
 
shows
different tongue signs indicating retention of residual pathogenic
factor.
2229
FIG. 107.4
 
Tongue signs in residual pathogenic factor
Types Of Residual Pathogenic Factor
As mentioned above, Heat, Dampness and Phlegm are the most
common aspects of a residual pathogenic factor; however,
Dampness and Phlegm may be located in various parts of the body
such as head, Stomach and Spleen, Gall-Bladder, Liver, ears, etc.
All these types of residual pathogenic factor are listed and
discussed below.
Effects Of Residual Pathogenic Factor
The main effect of a residual pathogenic factor is not only to give
rise to a chronic condition but also to predispose the patient to
further invasions of Wind, which, in turn, would reinforce the
residual pathogenic factor itself, thus creating a vicious circle. For
example, an invasion of Wind may lead to the formation of Phlegm
in the Lungs; this obstructs the descending and diffusing of Lung-
Qi and weakens the Defensive-Qi and therefore predisposes the
patient to a further invasion of Wind.
Other effects of residual pathogenic factors are mostly due to
Heat and Dampness/Phlegm. Lingering Heat will tend to injure
Yin, which becomes a complication of a residual pathogenic factor.
2230
Dampness/Phlegm will tend to obstruct the Spleen and aggravate
a Qi deficiency (
Fig. 107.5
 
).
FIG. 107.5
 
Effects of residual pathogenic factor
Treatment Of Residual Pathogenic Factor
Residual pathogenic factors are treated simply as any other
interior pathogenic factors, the treatment 
principles being clearing
Heat and resolving Dampness or Phlegm. What needs to be
stressed, however, is the importance of diagnosing the retention of
a pathogenic factor and clearing it properly before tonifying. Very
often one of the main presenting symptoms will be tiredness after
an invasion (or repeated invasions of Wind) and it would be easy to
think that we need to tonify the Upright Qi; however, if there is a
residual pathogenic factor this would definitely be a mistake. In
the presence of a residual pathogenic factor, we must definitely
clear it first (by clearing Heat or resolving Phlegm, or both) and, if
our diagnosis is correct, the patient will feel better. Often it is not
even necessary to tonify Qi afterwards as the removal of Heat and
Phlegm (especially the latter) will cause Qi to move and transform
better.
PHLEGM
Damp-Phlegm In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Persistent cough with expectoration of abundant, white sputum
after an invasion of Wind, a feeling of oppression of the chest,
2231
breathlessness, wheezing, a feeling of heaviness, poor appetite,
nausea.
Tongue
 
Sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 Fenglong, LU-1
Zhongfu, BL-13 Feishu.
Prescription
Er Chen Tang 
Two Old Decoction
 
.
Phlegm-Heat In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Persistent barking cough with expectoration of abundant yellow
sputum after an invasion of Wind, a feeling of oppression of the
chest, a feeling of heat, possibly low-grade fever, thirst,
breathlessness, wheezing, a feeling of heaviness, irritability,
nausea.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-40 Fenglong, LU-1
Zhongfu, BL-13 Feishu, LI-11 Quchi, Du-14 Dazhui.
Prescription
Wen Dan Tang 
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
 
.
DAMPNESS
Dampness In The Stomach And Spleen
Clinical manifestations
Epigastric fullness and pain following an invasion of Wind, poor
2232
appetite, nausea, vomiting, loose stools, diarrhoea, a feeling of
heaviness.
Tongue
 
Sticky coating in the centre.
Pulse
 
Slippery or Soggy.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-13 Shangwan, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-34
Liangqiu, ST-25 Tianshu.
Prescription
Huo Po Xia Ling Tang 
Agastache-Magnolia-Pinellia-Poria Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Stomach And Spleen
Clinical manifestations
Epigastric fullness and pain following an invasion of Wind, poor
appetite, nausea, vomiting, loose stools with a strong odour,
diarrhoea, a feeling of heaviness, thirst, a feeling of heat, bitter
taste, irritability, insomnia, dark urine.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating in the centre.
Pulse
 
Slippery and Rapid.
Acupuncture
Ren-12 Zhongwan, Ren-13 Shangwan, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, LI-4 Hegu, Ren-11 Jianli, ST-21 Liangmen, ST-34
Liangqiu, ST-25 Tianshu, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Lian Po Yin 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Gall-Bladder
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial fullness and pain following an invasion of Wind,
poor appetite, dry throat, bitter taste, irritability, headache.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow unilateral coating.
2233
Pulse
 
Wiry-Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, GB-34 Yanglingquan, GB-24 Riyue, SP-9 Yinlingquan,
ST-19 Burong.
Prescription
Yin Chen Hao Tang 
Artemisia Yinchenhao Decoction
Hao Qin Qing Dan Tang 
Artemisia-Scutellaria Clearing the Gall-
Bladder Decoction
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Ears
Clinical manifestations
Recurrent earache following repeated invasions of Wind, especially
in children, fever, irritability, insomnia, crying at night in small
children, yellow discharge from the ear, deafness.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, TB-5 Waiguan, TB-17 Yifeng, GB-43 Xiaxi.
Prescription
Gan Lu Xiao Du Dan 
Sweet Dew Dissolving Toxin Pill
 
plus Chai Hu
Radix Bupleuri
 
and Jie Geng 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
.
Damp-Heat In The Head
Clinical manifestations
Recurrent sinusitis following repeated invasions of Wind, runny
nose with a thick discharge, swollen adenoids, nasal voice,
recurrent ear infections, irritability, insomnia, crying at night in
small children, catarrh, swollen glands in the neck.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
2234
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu, LU-7 Lieque, LI-20 Yingxiang, SP-9
Yinlingquan, Ren-12 Zhongwan.
Prescription
Cang Er Bi Dou Yan Fang 
Xanthium Sinusitis Formula
 
(if Damp-
Heat in Stomach and Spleen)
Long Dan Bi Yuan Fang 
Gentiana Sinusitis Formula
 
or Qing Gan
Tou Ding Tang 
Clearing the Liver Head Calming Decoction
 
(if Damp-
Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder)
Xin Yi Qing Fei Yin 
Flos Magnoliae Clearing the Lungs Decoction
 
(if
Damp-Heat in the head with Lung-Heat).
Table 107.1
 
compares and contrasts the prescriptions for
residual Damp-Heat in the head.
Table 107.1
Comparison of formulae for residual pathogenic factor in the
head (sinusitis)
HEAT
2235
Heat In The Lungs
Clinical manifestations
Cough with expectoration of scanty yellow sputum following an
invasion of Wind, a feeling of heat, sweating, thirst, insomnia.
Tongue
 
Yellow coating in the front of the tongue.
Pulse
 
Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-5 Chize, LU-1 Zhongfu, BL-13 Feishu, LI-11 Quchi.
Prescription
Xie Bai San 
Draining the White Powder
Zhu Ye Shi Gao Tang 
Lophaterus-Gypsum Decoction
 
.
Heat In The Lungs With Dryness
Clinical manifestations
Dry cough with expectoration of very scanty sputum after repeated
bouts of cough, following an invasion of Wind, a feeling of
tightness of the chest, a dry mouth, a feeling of heat.
Tongue
 
Dry coating.
Pulse
 
Fine-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-9 Taiyuan, LU-7 Lieque, Ren-12 Zhongwan, LU-1 Zhongfu, BL-
13 Feishu, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Qing Zao Jiu Fei Tang 
Clearing Dryness Rescuing the Lungs Decoction
.
Heat In The Stomach
Clinical manifestations
Epigastric pain following an invasion of Wind, thirst, sweating,
2236
restlessness, insomnia, fever.
Tongue
 
Yellow coating in the centre, red points around the
centre.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Overflowing.
Acupuncture
ST-44 Neiting, LI-11 Quchi, LI-4 Hegu.
Prescription
Xie Huang San 
Draining Yellowness Powder
 
.
Toxic Heat In The Tonsils
Clinical manifestations
Recurrent attacks of tonsillitis following repeated invasions of
Wind, chronically swollen tonsils, difficulty in swallowing, catarrh,
swollen adenoids, poor appetite, tiredness, irritability, insomnia,
crying at night in small children.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery-Rapid.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, ST-18 Futu, ST-44 Neiting, SI-5 Yanggu, Ren-12
Zhongwan.
Prescription
Li Yan Cha plus Da Qing Ye 
Folium Isatidis seu Baphicacanthi
 
and
Shan Dou Gen 
Radix Sophorae subprostratae
 
(caution with the
latter). In children, add also Shen Qu 
Massa Fermentata Medicinalis
.
LESSER-YANG PATTERN
Lesser-Yang Pattern (Six Stages)
Clinical manifestations
2237
Alternations of shivers and fever following an invasion of Wind,
bitter taste, dry throat, blurred vision, hypochondrial fullness and
distension, absence of desire to eat or drink, irritability, nausea,
vomiting.
Tongue
 
Unilateral thin white coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Fine.
Acupuncture
TB-5 Waiguan, TB-6 Zhigou, GB-41 Zulinqi, Du-13 Taodao.
Prescription
Xiao Chai Hu Tang 
Small Bupleurum Decoction
 
.
Heat In The Gall-Bladder (Four Levels)
Clinical manifestations
Alternating hot and cold feeling with a prevalence of heat
following an invasion of Wind, swollen glands in the neck, earache,
headache, bitter taste, thirst, dry throat, hypochondrial pain,
nausea, a feeling of fullness in the epigastrium.
Tongue
 
Red with unilateral sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry-Rapid.
Acupuncture
GB-34 Yanglingquan, GB-43 Xiaxi, TB-6 Zhigou, TB-5 Waiguan.
Prescription
Hao Qin Qing Dan Tang 
Artemisia-Scutellaria Clearing the Gall-
Bladder Decoction
 
.
Box 107.2
 
summarizes the patterns of residual pathogenic factor.
 
BOX 107.2
 
   
 
TYPES OF RESIDUAL
PATHOGENIC FACTOR
Phlegm
• 
 
Damp-Phlegm in Lungs
• 
 
Phlegm-Heat in Lungs
2238
Dampness
• 
 
Dampness in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Gall-Bladder
• 
 
Damp-Heat in ears
• 
 
Damp-Heat in Head
Heat
• 
 
Heat in Lungs
• 
 
Heat in Lungs with Dryness
• 
 
Heat in Stomach
• 
 
Toxic Heat in tonsils
Lesser-Yang patterns
• 
 
Lesser-Yang pattern (Six Stages)
• 
 
Heat in Gall-Bladder (Four Levels)
NOTES
1. 
San Pedro, G. ‘Bronchitis: when are antibiotics needed?’.
Infectious Medicine
 
. 1998; 15(11):768–769.
2. 
San Pedro, G. ‘Bronchitis: when are antibiotics needed?’.
Infectious Medicine
 
. 1998; 15(11):768–769.
2239
SECTION 4
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING
TO THE EIGHT
PRINCIPLES, 12
CHANNELS,
EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY
VESSELS AND
2240
FIVE ELEMENTS
2241
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT
PRINCIPLES, 12
CHANNELS, EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY
VESSELS AND FIVE
ELEMENTS
Section contents
108. 
 
Identification of patterns according to the Eight Principles
2242
109. 
 
Identification of patterns according to the 12 channels
110. 
 
Identification of patterns according to the Eight Extraordinary
Vessels
111. 
 
Identification of patterns according to the Five Elements
INTRODUCTION
Identification of patterns according to the Eight
Principles
Elements of this method of identification of patterns are found
throughout Chinese medical texts starting from the ‘Yellow
Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’ and the ‘Discussion of
Cold-induced Disorders’ (see Bibliography). In its present form,
this method of identifying patterns was formulated by Cheng
Zhong Ling in the early Qing dynasty.
Identification of patterns according to the Eight Principles is
based on the categories of Interior/Exterior, Heat/Cold, Full/Empty
and Yin/Yang. It is the summarization of all other modes of
identifying patterns and is applicable in all cases for both interior
and exterior diseases.
Identification of patterns according to the 12 channels
This method of pattern identification is the oldest known as it is
described in 
Chapter 32
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’. It describes the
symptoms and signs arising from the channel, when the organs
are not affected.
Identification of patterns according to the Eight
Extraordinary Channels
This method of identification of patterns is based on the patterns
or disharmony of the Eight Extraordinary Vessels.
Identification of patterns according to the Five
Elements
The identification of patterns according to the Five Elements
describes the patterns of disharmony purely from the point of
2243
view of Five Elements. This is useful as a general indication for two
reasons: first, it can help us to plot the progression of a
pathological condition from one Element to the other (bearing in
mind that a progression along the Controlling cycle is more
serious); secondly, the Five-Element patterns are sometimes useful
to form a picture of the mental–emotional condition of the patient.
2244
CHAPTER
108
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT
PRINCIPLES
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
INTERIOR–EXTERIOR
Exterior conditions
Interior conditions
HOT–COLD
Hot conditions
Cold conditions
Combined Hot and Cold conditions
2245
FULL–EMPTY
Full conditions
Empty conditions
Combined Full–Empty conditions
YIN-YANG
INTRODUCTION
The identification of patterns according to the Eight Principles of
Interior and Exterior, Full and Empty, Hot and Cold, and Yin and
Yang is the foundation for all the other methods of pattern
formulation. It is the basic groundwork of pattern identification in
Chinese medicine, allowing the practitioner to identify the location
and nature of the disharmony, as well as establish the principle of
treatment.
Although the term ‘Eight Principles’ is relatively recent in
Chinese Medicine (early Qing dynasty), their main aspects were
discussed both in the ‘Yellow Emperor Classic of Internal
Medicine’ and in the ‘Discussion on Cold-induced Diseases’ (see
Bibliography). Both these classics contain many references to
Interior/Exterior, Hot/Cold, Full/Empty and Yin/Yang characters of
diseases.
Doctor Zhang Jing Yue (also called Zhang Jie Bin) (1563–1640)
discussed the identification of patterns according to the above
principles and called it the ‘Six Changes’ (
Liu Bian
 
), these being
Interior/Exterior, Full/Empty and Hot/Cold.
During the early Qing dynasty, at the time of Emperor Kang Xi
(1561–1640), doctor Cheng Zhong Ling wrote the ‘Essential
Comprehension of Medical Studies’ (
Yi Xue Xin Wu
 
), in which he,
for the first time, used the term ‘Eight Principles’ (
Ba Gang
 
).
The method of identification of patterns according to the Eight
Principles differs from all the others in so far as it is the theoretical
basis for all of them and is applicable in every case. For example,
the method of identification of patterns according to the channels
is applicable only in channel problems, and that according to the
2246
Internal Organs only in organ problems, but the identification of
patterns according to the Eight Principles is applicable in 
every
case because it allows us to distinguish Exterior from Interior, Hot
from Cold and Full from Empty. It therefore allows us to decide
which method of identification of patterns applies to a particular
case. No condition is too complex to fall outside the scope of
identification according to the Eight Principles.
It is important to realize that identifying a pattern according to
the Eight Principles does not mean rigidly ‘categorizing’ the
disharmony in order to ‘fit’ the clinical manifestations into pigeon-
holes. On the contrary, an understanding of the Eight Principles
allows us to unravel complicated patterns and identify the basic
contradictions within them, reducing the various disease
manifestations to the bare relevant essentials. Although this
process might seem rigid and somewhat forced in the beginning,
after a few years of practice, it will become completely natural and
spontaneous.
The Eight Principles should not be seen in terms of ‘either–or’.
It is not at all unusual to see conditions that are Exterior and
Interior simultaneously, or Hot and Cold, or Full and Empty or Yin
and Yang. It is even possible for a condition to be all of these at the
same time. The purpose of applying the Eight Principles is not to
categorize the disharmony, but to understand its genesis and
nature. It is only by understanding this that we can decide on
treatment for a particular disharmony.
Moreover, not every condition need have all four characteristics
(Interior or Exterior, Hot or Cold, Full or Empty and Yin or Yang).
For example, a condition need not necessarily be either Hot or
Cold. Deficiency of Blood is a case in point as it does not involve
any Hot or Cold symptoms.
INTERIOR–EXTERIOR
The differentiation between Exterior and Interior is made not on
the basis of what caused the disharmony (aetiology), but rather on
that of the location of the disease. For example, a disease may be
caused by an exterior pathogenic factor, but if this is affecting the
Internal Organs the condition will be classified as interior.
2247
Exterior Conditions
An exterior condition affects the skin, muscles and channels. An
interior condition affects the Internal Organs and bones. Skin,
muscles and channels are also called the ‘Exterior’ of the body, and
the Internal Organs the ‘Interior’. In the context of exterior
diseases from Wind, the Exterior is sometimes also called the
‘Lung Defensive-Qi portion’, as the Lungs control both the skin
and the Defensive Qi, which circulates in the skin and muscles.
The clinical manifestations arising from invasion of the Exterior
by a pathogenic factor are also called an ‘exterior pattern’, whereas
the manifestations arising from a disharmony of the Internal
Organs are called an ‘interior pattern’.
When we say that an exterior condition affects the skin, muscles
and channels, we mean that these areas have been invaded by an
exterior pathogenic factor, giving rise to typical ‘exterior’ clinical
manifestations. However, it would be wrong to assume that any
problem manifesting on the skin is an ‘exterior pattern’. In fact,
most chronic skin problems are due to an interior pattern
manifesting on the skin.
There are two broad types of exterior conditions: those that
affect skin and muscles and are caused by an exterior pathogenic
factor having an acute onset (such as in invasion of Wind-Cold or
Wind-Heat); and those that affect the channels and have a slower
onset (such as in Painful Obstruction Syndrome).
Acute invasion of Wind on the Exterior
When an exterior pathogenic factor invades skin and muscles it
gives rise to a typical set of symptoms and signs, which are
described as an ‘exterior pattern’. It is difficult to generalize as to
what these symptoms and signs are, as it depends on the other
characteristics, that is, whether they are of the Cold or Hot type, or
the Empty or Full type. However, fever and aversion to cold
occurring simultaneously always indicate an invasion from an
exterior pathogenic factor.
Generally speaking, we can say that the main symptoms of an
exterior pattern are fever, aversion to cold, aching body, a stiff neck
and a Floating pulse. The onset is acute and the correct treatment
2248
will usually induce a swift and marked improvement of the
condition.
The symptoms of invasion of Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat were
described in 
Chapter 103
 
.
The main factors in differentiating the Hot or Cold character of
an exterior pattern are listed in 
Box 108.1
 
.
 
BOX 108.1
 
   
 
FACTORS
DIFFERENTIATING HOT AND COLD
EXTERIOR PATTERNS
• 
 
Thirst (Hot) or its absence (Cold)
• 
 
Presence (Heat) or absence (Cold) of sore throat
• 
 
Tight or Slow (Cold) or Rapid (Hot) pulse
The character of an exterior pattern will further depend on its
Full or Empty character. If a person has a tendency to deficiency of
Qi or Blood, the exterior pattern will have an Empty character. This
is also described as an exterior pattern from Wind-Cold with
prevalence of Wind (see 
Chapters 103
 
and 
105
 
).
If a person has a tendency to Fullness, the exterior pattern will
have a Full character. This is also described as an exterior pattern
from Wind-Cold with prevalence of Cold (see 
Chapter 105
 
).
The main factors in differentiating an Empty from Full Exterior
condition are listed in 
Box 108.2
 
.
 
BOX 108.2
 
   
 
FACTORS
DIFFERENTIATING EMPTY AND FULL
EXTERIOR CONDITIONS
• 
 
Sweating (Empty) or its absence (Full)
• 
 
Slowed-down pulse (Empty) or Tight pulse (Full)
• 
 
Severe body aches (Full) or slight body aches (Empty)
It must be stressed that the terms ‘Full’ and ‘Empty’ describing
the character of an exterior condition are only relative, and do not
2249
represent actual Fullness and Emptiness. In fact, an exterior
pattern is characterized by Fullness by definition as it consists in
an invasion by an exterior pathogenic factor. The person’s Qi is still
relatively intact and the pathogenic factor fights against the body’s
Qi. It is precisely this that defines a Full condition: that is, one
characterized by the presence of a pathogenic factor and the
resulting struggle with the body’s Qi. Thus, an exterior condition
must, by definition be Full. However, according to a person’s pre-
existing condition, one can further differentiate an exterior
condition between Full and Empty, but only in relative terms.
Gradual invasion of external pathogenic factors in the
channels (Painful Obstruction Syndrome)
The second kind of exterior pattern is that occurring when an
exterior pathogenic factor invades the channels in a gradual way
causing Painful Obstruction Syndrome. This is characterized by
obstruction to the circulation of Qi in channels and joints by a
pathogenic factor, which can be Cold, Dampness, Wind or Heat.
In obstruction from Cold, usually only one joint is affected, the
pain is severe and is relieved by application of heat. In obstruction
from Wind, the pain moves from joint to joint. In obstruction from
Dampness, there will be swelling of the joints. In obstruction from
Heat, the pain is severe and the joints are swollen and hot.
These pathogenic factor patterns have been described in
Chapter 103
 
.
Interior Conditions
A disharmony is defined as interior when the Internal Organs are
affected. This may or may not have arisen from an exterior
pathogenic factor, but once the disease is located in the Interior it
is defined as an interior pattern, and treated as such.
It is impossible to generalize about the clinical manifestations of
interior conditions as these will depend on the organ affected, and
whether the condition is Hot or Cold and Full or Empty. Most of
the Internal Organs patterns described in 
Chapters 91
 
–
100
 
are
internal patterns.
2250
HOT–COLD
Hot and Cold describe the nature of a pattern, and their clinical
manifestations depend on whether they are combined with a Full
or Empty condition.
Hot Conditions
Full-Heat
The main manifestations of interior Full-Heat are fever, thirst, a
feeling of heat, red face, red eyes, constipation, scanty dark urine, a
Rapid-Full pulse, and a Red tongue with yellow coating. (Exterior
Heat has already been discussed above.)
These are only the general symptoms of Full-Heat, however, as
many others are possible depending on which organ is mostly
affected. Fever need not always be present as many conditions of
interior Full-Heat such as Liver-Fire or Heart-Fire do not involve
fever.
Aside from the above clinical manifestations, there are other
diagnostic guides which indicate Heat. Any raised, red skin
eruption which feels hot indicates Heat. For example, acute
urticaria normally takes this form. As for pain, any burning
sensation indicates Heat, for example the burning sensation of
cystitis, or a burning feeling in the stomach. Any loss of blood
with large quantities of dark-red blood usually indicates Heat in
the Blood (if the blood were fresh-red, the bleeding may be due to
Qi deficiency). So far as the mind is 
concerned, any condition of
extreme restlessness or manic behaviour, indicates Heat in the
Heart.
Box 108.3
 
summarizes the manifestations of Full-Heat.
 
BOX 108.3
 
   
 
FULL-HEAT
• 
 
Fever
• 
 
Thirst
• 
 
Feeling of heat
• 
 
Red face
• 
 
Red eyes
• 
 
Constipation
• 
 
Dark urine
2251
• 
 
Full-Rapid pulse
• 
 
Red tongue with yellow coating
• 
 
Raised, red skin eruptions
• 
 
Burning pain
• 
 
Mental restlessness, agitation
Full-Heat arises when there is an excess of Yang energies in the
body. Common causes of this are excessive consumption of hot-
energy foods or long-standing emotional problems, in which the
stagnation of Qi generates Heat. The former will mostly cause
Stomach- or Liver-Heat, whereas the latter will mostly cause Liver-
or Heart-Heat.
Full-Heat can also develop from the invasion of an exterior
pathogenic factor which turns into Heat once in the body. Most
pathogenic factors, including Cold, are likely to turn into Heat
once in the body. A typical example of this is when exterior Cold or
Heat turns into Heat and settles in the Stomach, Lung or
Intestines causing high fever, sweating and thirst. The Bright Yang
pattern of the Six-Stage pattern identification and the Qi level of
the Four-Level pattern identification describe such situations.
From the Yin-Yang point of view, Full-Heat arises from excess of
Yang.
Empty-Heat
The main manifestations of Empty-Heat are afternoon fever or a
feeling of heat in the afternoon/evening, a dry mouth, a dry throat
at night with a desire to drink in small sips, night sweating, a
feeling of heat in the chest, palms and soles (also called ‘five-palm
heat’), a feeling of heat in the evening, dry stools, scanty dark
urine, a Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse and a Red-Peeled tongue.
Again, these are only the general symptoms and signs; others
depend on which organ is mostly affected. Aside from these
manifestations, Empty-Heat can easily be recognized from a
typical feeling of mental restlessness, fidgeting and vague anxiety.
The person feels that something is wrong, but is unable to
describe what or how. Empty-Heat restlessness is quite different
2252
from that of Full-Heat, and one can almost visually perceive the
Emptiness underlying the Heat.
Box 108.4
 
summarizes the manifestations of Empty-Heat.
 
BOX 108.4
 
   
 
EMPTY-HEAT
• 
 
Afternoon fever
• 
 
Feeling of heat in the afternoon/evening
• 
 
Dry mouth and throat with desire to drink in small
sips
• 
 
Night sweating
• 
 
Five-palm heat
• 
 
Dry stools
• 
 
Scanty dark urine
• 
 
Mental restlessness, fidgeting, vague anxiety
• 
 
Red tongue without coating
• 
 
Floating-Empty and Rapid pulse
 
The mental restlessness from Empty-Heat differs from
that from Full-Heat in so far as it is a vague feeling of
anxiety, a quieter form of restlessness and a tendency
tofidget.
From the Yin-Yang point of view, Empty-Heat arises from
deficiency of Yin. If the Yin energy is deficient for a long period of
time, the Yin is consumed and the Yang is relatively in excess. It is
important to stress that Empty-Heat derives 
eventually
 
from Yin
deficiency but there will usually be a stage of Yin deficiency
without Empty-Heat.
In practice, it is important to differentiate Full-Heat from
Empty-Heat as the treatment method in the former case is to clear
the Heat, whereas in the latter case it is to nourish Yin. The main
points of differentiation between Full-Heat and Empty-Heat are
listed in 
Table 108.1
 
.
2253
Table 108.1
Differentiation between Full-Heat and Empty-Heat
 
Full-Heat
Empty-Heat
Face
Whole face red
Malar flush
Thirst
Desire to drink cold water in large
amounts
Desire to drink in small sips
Eyelid
Inside of lower eyelid red
Thin red line inside lower eyelid
Taste
Bitter taste
No bitter taste
Feeling of heat
All day
In the afternoon or evening
Fever
High fever
Low-grade fever
Mind
Very restless and agitated
Vague anxiety, fidgety
Bowels
Constipation, abdominal pain
Dry stools, no abdominal pain
Bleeding
Profuse
Not so profuse
Sleep
Dream-disturbed, restless
Waking up frequently during the night
Skin
Red-hot-painful skin eruptions
Scarlet-red, not raised, painless skin
eruptions
Pulse
Full-Overflowing-Rapid
Floating-Empty and Rapid
Tongue
Red with yellow coating
Red without coating
Treatment
method
Clear Heat
Nourish Yin, clear Empty-Heat
Cold Conditions
Full-Cold
The main manifestations of Cold are chilliness, cold limbs,
absence of thirst, pale face, abdominal pain aggravated by
pressure and by ingestion of cold drinks and foods, a desire to
drink warm liquids, loose stools, abundant clear urination, a Deep-
Full-Tight pulse and 
a tongue with thick white coating. (These are
the clinical manifestation of interior Full-Cold as exterior Cold has
already been described above.)
Cold contracts and obstructs and this often causes pain. Hence
pain, especially abdominal pain, is a frequent manifestation of
Full-Cold. Also, anything that is white, concave (as opposed to
raised), bluish-purple may indicate Cold. For example, a pale face
or Pale tongue, a white tongue coating, concave very pale spots on
the tongue, a Bluish-Purple tongue and bluish lips or fingers and
toes.
From the Yin-Yang point of view, Full-Cold arises from excess of
Yin. Interior Full-Cold can arise from direct invasion of exterior
Cold into the Interior. In particular, exterior Cold can invade the
Stomach causing vomiting and epigastric pain, the Intestines
2254
causing diarrhoea and abdominal pain, or the Uterus causing
dysmenorrhoea. All these conditions would have an acute onset.
Cold can also invade the Liver channel causing swelling and
pain of the scrotum.
Box 108.5
 
summarizes the general manifestations of Full-Cold.
 
BOX 108.5
 
   
 
FULL-COLD
• 
 
Feeling of cold
• 
 
Cold limbs
• 
 
Absence of thirst
• 
 
Pale (bright-white) face
• 
 
Abdominal pain aggravated by pressure and
ingestion of cold drinks and foods
• 
 
Abundant clear urination
• 
 
Bluish lips, fingers, toes
• 
 
Pain of acute onset
• 
 
Pale or Bluish-Purple tongue with thick white coating
• 
 
Deep-Full-Tight pulse
Empty-Cold
The main manifestations of Empty-Cold are chilliness, cold limbs,
a dull-pale face, absence of thirst, dull pain releved by pressure,
listlessness, a desire to drink warm drinks, loose stools, abundant
clear urination, a sallow-white face, a Deep-Weak-Slow pulse and a
Pale tongue with thin white coating.
Box 108.6
 
summarizes the clinical manifestations of Empty-Cold.
 
BOX 108.6
 
   
 
EMPTY-COLD
• 
 
Feeling of cold
• 
 
Cold limbs
• 
 
Loose stools
• 
 
Desire to drink warm drinks
• 
 
Dull-pale face
• 
 
Absence of thirst
• 
 
Listlessness
• 
 
Abundant clear urination
• 
 
Deep-Weak-Slow pulse
2255
• 
 
Pale tongue with thin white coating
From the Yin-Yang point of view, Empty-Cold arises from
deficiency of Yang. Empty-Cold develops when Yang-Qi is weak
and fails to warm the body. It is mostly related to Spleen-Yang,
Kidney-Yang, Heart-Yang or Lung-Qi deficiency.
Table 108.2
 
differentiates the manifestations of Full-Cold from
those of Empty-Cold.
Table 108.2
Differentiation between Full-Cold and Empty-Cold
 
Full-Cold
Empty-Cold
Face
Bright-white
Sallow-white
Pain
Strong, spastic, crampy, worse with pressure
Dull, better with pressure
Bowels
Better after bowel movement
Worse after bowel movement
Pulse
Full-Tight-Deep
Weak-Deep-Slow
Tongue
Pale or Bluish-Purple body, thick white coating
Pale body, Thin white coating
Combined Hot And Cold Conditions
A condition can often be characterized by the presence of both
Heat and Cold. These can be Cold on the Exterior and Heat in the
Interior, Heat on the Exterior and Cold in the Interior, Heat above
and Cold below. Furthermore, in some cases, some of the
symptoms 
and signs may point to a false appearance of Heat
whereas the true condition is Cold, or vice versa.
Cold on the Exterior–Heat in the Interior
This condition is found when a person has a pre-existing condition
of interior Heat and is subsequently invaded by exterior Wind-
Cold.
The symptoms and signs would include a fever with aversion to
cold, absence of sweating, a headache and stiff neck, aches
throughout the body (manifestations of exterior Cold), irritability
and thirst (manifestations of interior Heat).
The situation also occurs in attacks of Latent Heat combined
2256
with a new invasion of Wind-Cold.
Heat on the Exterior–Cold in the Interior
This situation simply occurs when a person with a Cold condition
is attacked by exterior Wind-Heat. There will therefore be some
symptoms of exterior invasion of Wind-Heat (such as a fever with
aversion to cold, a sore throat, thirst, a headache and a Floating-
Rapid pulse) and some symptoms of interior Cold (such as loose
stools, chilliness and profuse pale urine).
Heat above–Cold below
In some cases there is Heat above (as Heat tends to rise) and Cold
below. The manifestations of this situation might be thirst,
irritability, sour regurgitation, bitter taste, mouth ulcers
(manifestations of Heat above), loose stools, borborygmi and
profuse pale urine (manifestations of Cold below).
True Cold–false Heat and true Heat–false Cold
In some cases there may be contradictory signs and symptoms,
some pointing to Heat and some to Cold. This usually happens
only in extreme conditions and is quite rare. It is important not to
confuse this phenomenon with common situations when Heat and
Cold are simply combined.
For example, it is perfectly possible for someone to have a
condition of Damp-Heat in the Bladder and Cold in the Spleen.
This is simply a combination of Hot and Cold signs in two
different organs, and does not fall under the category of false Heat
and true Cold or vice versa.
It is important to stress also that the situation of false Heat or
false Cold is quite different to the situation characterized by a
simultaneous deficiency of both Yin and Yang and therefore Heat
and Cold. For example, it is very common in women of
menopausal age to suffer from a simultaneous deficiency of
Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang (and therefore have simultaneous
symptoms of Heat and Cold); in this case, the Heat and Cold are
purely simultaneous and co existing and they are both ‘true’.
In cases of false Heat and false Cold, tongue diagnosis shows its
2257
most useful aspect as the tongue-body colour nearly always
reflects the true condition. If the tongue-body colour is Red this
indicates Heat; if it is Pale it indicates Cold.
 
The tongue-body colour is the most important factor in
differentiating true from false Heat and true from false
Cold: if the tongue-body colour is Pale this indicates
true Cold; if it is Red, it indicates true Heat.
It is worth mentioning here that false Heat and false Cold are
definitely not the same as Empty-Heat and Empty-Cold. Empty-
Heat and Empty-Cold arise from deficiency of Yin or Yang
respectively, but are nevertheless true Heat or Cold conditions. In
false Heat and false Cold, the appearance is false, that is, there is
no Heat or no Cold respectively.
The manifestations of false Heat and false Cold are illustrated in
Table 108.3
 
.
Table 108.3
Differentiation between True Cold–False Heat and True Heat–
False Cold
Diagnostic
methods
True Cold–False Heat
True Heat–False Cold
By looking
Red cheeks but red colour is like powder, while rest
of face is white, irritability but also listlessness, a
desire to lie with the body curled up, Pale and wet
tongue
Dark face, bright eyes with
lustre, dry red lips, irritability,
strong body, Red tongue
By hearing
Breathing quiet, low voice
Breathing noisy, loud voice
By asking
Thirst but no desire to drink or a desire to drink
warm fluids, body feels hot but patient likes to be
covered, sore throat but without redness or
swelling, pale urine
Thirst with a desire to drink cold
fluids, scanty dark urine,
constipation, a burning
sensation in anus
By
palpation
Rapid and Overflowing pulse, but Empty
Deep-Full pulse, limbs cold,
chest hot
FULL–EMPTY
The differentiation between Full and Empty is an extremely
important one. The distinction is made according to the presence
2258
or absence of a pathogenic factor and to the strength of the body’s
energies.
A Full condition is characterized by the presence of a pathogenic
factor (which may be interior or exterior) of 
any kind and by the
fact that the body’s Qi is relatively intact. It therefore battles
against the pathogenic factor and this results in the rather
plethoric character of the symptoms and signs.
An Empty condition is characterized by weakness of the body’s
Qi and the absence of a pathogenic factor.
If the body’s Qi is weak but a pathogenic factor lingers on, the
condition is one of Empty character complicated with Fullness.
The distinction between Full and Empty is one which is more
than any other made on the basis of observation (
Table 108.4
 
). A
strong, loud voice, an excruciatingpain, a very red face, profuse
sweating, restlessness, throwing off the bedclothes and outbursts
of temper are all signs of a Full condition. A weak voice, a dull
lingering pain, a very pale face, slight sweating, listlessness,
curling up in bed and quiet disposition are all signs of an Empty
condition.
Table 108.4
Comparison of Empty and Full conditions
 
Empty
Full
Course
Chronic
Acute
Mind
Listlessness, apathy, poor memory
Restlessness, irritability
Voice
Weak
Strong
Breathing
Weak
Coarse
Face
Pale
Red
Tinnitus
Low pitched
High pitched
Pain
Dull, alleviated by pressure
Excruciating, aggravated by pressure
Sweating
Slight
Profuse
Stools
Loose
Constipation
Urination
Normal
Scanty
Other signs/symptoms
Lying curled up
Throwing off of bedclothes
Pulse
Empty
Excess
The pulse is another very important factor in differentiating Full
from Empty conditions: in Full conditions the pulse is of the Full
type, whereas in Empty conditions it is of the Empty type.
Box 108.7
 
summarizes the characteristics of Full, Empty and
Full–Empty conditions.
2259
 
BOX 108.7
 
   
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF
FULL, EMPTY AND FULL-EMPTY
CONDITIONS
Full
• 
 
A Full condition is characterized by the presence of a
pathogenic factor (which may be internal or external)
while the body’s Qi is still intact and reacting against the
pathogenic factor
Empty
• 
 
An Empty condition is characterized by a deficiency
of the body’s Qi and the absence of a pathogenic factor
Full–Empty
• 
 
A mixed Full–Empty condition is characterized by the
presence of a pathogenic factor (generally internal) and
a deficiency of the body’s Qi which is reacting
inadequately against the pathogenic factor; in some
cases, the deficiency of the body’s Qi itself leads to the
formation of a pathogenic factor
Full Conditions
The main clinical manifestations of a Full condition are acute
disease, restlessness, irritability, a red face, a strong voice, coarse
breathing, pain aggravated by pressure, high-pitched tinnitus,
profuse sweating, scanty urination, constipation and a pulse of the
Excess type.
As usual, it is difficult to generalize and some of the above
symptoms cannot, strictly speaking, be categorized as Full
symptoms. Just to give one example, constipation is included
among the Full symptoms because it is often caused by stagnation
or by Heat, but there are also Empty causes of constipation, such
as Blood or Yin deficiency. Moreover, the above symptoms are
broad generalizations, indeed too general to be of use in clinical
2260
practice.
Many examples could be given of Full conditions. First of all, any
exterior condition due to invasion of exterior Cold, Wind, Damp or
Heat is Full by definition, as it is characterized by the presence of
those exterior pathogenic factors.
Any interior pathogenic factor also gives rise to a Full condition,
provided the body’s Qi is strong enough to engage in a struggle
against such pathogenic factors. Examples of these are interior
Cold, Heat, Dampness, Wind, Fire and Phlegm. Stagnation of Qi
and stasis of Blood are also Full conditions.
Empty Conditions
The main clinical manifestations of an Empty condition are
chronic disease, listlessness, apathy, lying curled up, a weak voice,
weak breathing, low-pitch tinnitus, pain alleviated by pressure,
poor memory, slight sweating, frequent urination, loose stools and
a pulse of the Empty type.
We can distinguish four types of Emptiness: Empty-Qi, Empty-
Yang, Empty-Blood and Empty-Yin.
Empty-Qi
The clinical manifestations of Empty-Qi are slight shortness of
breath, weak voice, spontaneous sweating, poor appetite, loose
stools, tiredness, pale complexion, a dislike of speaking and an
Empty pulse.
These are only the symptoms of Lung- and Spleen-Qi Deficiency,
which are those customarily given in Chinese books, as it is the
Spleen that produces Qi and the Lungs that govern Qi. However,
there can be many other symptoms of emptiness of Qi, according
to which organ is involved, in particular the Heart or Kidneys.
These were described in 
Chapters 91
 
to 
100
 
.
Empty-Yang
The main clinical manifestations of Empty-Yang are: shortness of
breath, weak voice, spontaneous sweating, poor appetite, loose
stools, tiredness, bright-pale complexion, dislike of speaking, a
feeling of cold, cold limbs, absence of thirst, desire for hot drinks,
2261
frequent pale urination, Pale tongue and a Deep-Weak pulse.
The organs which most commonly suffer from Yang deficiency
are the Spleen, Kidneys, Lung, Heart and Stomach. The patterns
for each of these were discussed in the section on the Internal
Organs patterns (
Chapters 91
 
–
100
 
).
Empty-Blood
The main manifestations of Emptiness of Blood are a dull
complexion, dizziness, numbness, tingling of the limbs, poor
memory, blurred vision, insomnia, pale lips, dry eyes, white nails,
floaters, palpitations, scanty periods, amenorrhoea, infertility, Pale
and Thin tongue, and Choppy or Fine pulse.
The above general symptoms are due to dysfunction of various
organs. In addition, Emptiness of Liver-Blood causes dizziness,
blurred vision, depression, tiredness, numbness and scanty
periods. Emptiness of Heart-Blood causes pale face, pale lips, Pale
tongue and insomnia.
The organs which are most likely to suffer from Blood
Emptiness are the Liver, Heart and Spleen. These patterns were
described in 
Chapters 91
 
–93.
Empty-Yin
The main manifestations of Emptiness of Yin are a dry mouth, dry
throat at night, night sweating, dizziness, tinnitus, tiredness, thin
body, insomnia, a tongue without coating, and a Fine or Floating-
Empty pulse.
Again, the above are only the general symptoms of Emptiness of
Yin, other symptoms depending on which organ is mostly
involved. The organs most likely to suffer from Yin deficiency are
the Kidneys, Lung, Heart, Liver and Stomach.
Combined Full–Empty Conditions
Conditions characterized by a combination of Emptiness and
Fullness arise when there is a pathogenic 
factor but while its
influence is not very strong the body’s Qi is weak and not reacting
properly against it. Examples of conditions of Emptiness
complicated with Fullness are: Kidney-Yin deficiency with rising of
2262
Liver-Yang, Kidney-Yin deficiency with flaring up of Heart Empty-
Heat, Spleen-Qi deficiency with retention of Dampness or Phlegm,
deficiency of Blood with stasis of Blood, and deficiency of Qi with
stasis of Blood.
YIN–YANG
The categories of Yin and Yang within the Eight Principles have
two meanings: in a general sense, they are a summarization of the
other six principles, whereas in a specific sense they are used
mostly in the patterns Emptiness of Yin and Yang and collapse of
Yin and Yang.
First, in the general sense, Yin and Yang are a generalization of
the other six principles since Interior, Emptiness and Cold are Yin
in nature, and Exterior, Fullness and Heat are Yang in nature.
Secondly, in the specific sense, the categories of Yin and Yang
can define two kinds of Emptiness and also two kinds of collapse.
Emptiness of Yin and Yang have already been described above and
in 
Chapter 101
 
.
Collapse of Yin or Yang simply indicates an extremely severe
state of Emptiness. It also implies a complete separation of Yin
and Yang from each other. Collapse of Yin or Yang is often, but not
necessarily, followed by death. They have already been described
in 
Chapter 101
 
.
2263
CHAPTER
109
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE 12 CHANNELS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
LUNGS
LARGE INTESTINE
STOMACH
SPLEEN
HEART
SMALL INTESTINE
BLADDER
KIDNEYS
PERICARDIUM
TRIPLE BURNER
GALL-BLADDER
LIVER
2264
The clinical manifestations of the patterns according to the 12
channels are as follows.
LUNGS
Main channel
Fever, cough, nasal congestion, headache, breathlessness, chest
pain, aversion to cold, a feeling of oppression of the chest, pain in
the upper back, clavicle, shoulders, elbows and inner aspect of the
arms, a feeling of heat in the palms.
Connecting channel
Empty
Yawning, frequent urination, shortness of breath.
Full
Hot palms.
Muscle channel
Pain, contraction and sprain of the muscles along the course of the
channel, pain and contraction of the muscles of the chest and
shoulder.
LARGE INTESTINE
Main channel
Sore throat, toothache, dry mouth, nosebleed, runny nose, swelling
of the neck, swollen and painful gums, red, painful and swollen
eyes, swelling of the throat, swelling and redness of the dorsum of
the hand, shoulder pain, swelling and numbness of the thumb,
pain along the course of the channel.
Connecting channel
2265
Empty
A sensation of cold in the teeth, a feeling of tightness in
diaphragm, loss of sense of smell.
Full
Toothache, deafness, tinnitus, a sensation of heat in the centre of
the chest, breathlessness.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness or sprain of the muscles along the course of the
channel, inability to raise the arm, inability to rotate the neck,
shoulder ache.
STOMACH
Main channel
Pain in the eyes, nosebleed, swelling of the neck, swelling and pain
of the throat, oedema, toothache, pain in the breast, thigh, knee,
shin, or outer aspect of the ankle and foot, inability to raise the
foot, mouth ulcers, facial paralysis, cold legs and feet, pain along
the course of the channel.
Connecting channel
Empty
Flaccidity or atrophy of leg muscles, a feeling of cold in the upper
teeth.
Full
Epilepsy, manic behaviour or depression, swollen and sore throat,
sudden loss of voice, nosebleed.
Great Connecting channel of the Spleen
Palpitations, a feeling of fullness of the chest.
Muscle channel
2266
Sprain of the middle toe, contraction of the muscles of the lower
leg and foot, stiffness of the thigh muscles, swelling in the groin,
hernia, spasm of the abdominal muscles, strained neck and cheek
muscles, deviation of the eyes and mouth, inability to close the eye
owing to muscle spasm, inability to open the eyes owing to
flaccidity of the muscles.
SPLEEN
Main channel
Vaginal discharge, a cold feeling along the channel, pain along the
channel (big toe, the inner aspect of the ankle, shin, knee, or
thigh), numbness/tingling of the leg, weakness of the leg muscles,
a feeling of heaviness of the legs, abdominal distension, epigastric
pain, stiffness and pain of the tongue, oedema of the feet or legs.
Connecting channel
Empty
Abdominal distension.
Full
Abdominal pain, food poisoning, vomiting, diarrhoea.
Great Connecting channel of the Spleen
Pain all over the body, weakness and flaccidity of the joints of the
four limbs, backache radiating to the abdomen.
Muscle channel
Strain of the big toe, pain in the inner aspect of the ankle, pain in
the muscles of the medial aspect of the knee and thigh, strain of
the muscles of the groin, strain of the abdominal muscles, pain in
the muscles of the chest and middle back.
HEART
2267
Main channel
Pain in the eyes, dry throat and mouth, numbness/tingling of the
arm, a feeling of heat and pain of the palms, chest pain, pain on
the inner side of the arm, pain of the shoulder and scapula,
palpitations, stiff tongue.
Connecting channel
Empty
Aphasia.
Full
A feeling of distension and fullness of the chest and diaphragm.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles along the course of the
channel.
SMALL INTESTINE
Main channel
Numbness and pain in the neck, pain in the elbow, stiff neck, pain
along the lateral side of the arm and 
scapula, sore throat, ear ache,
tinnitus, swelling of the chin.
Connecting channel
Empty
Scabies, long, finger-shaped warts.
Full
Loose joints of the shoulder, weakness of the muscles of the elbow
joint.
Muscle channel
2268
Stiffness and pain of the muscles of the little finger, arm and
elbow, sprain and pain of the muscles of the scapula, pain and
sprain of the neck muscles, pain from the ear to the mandible,
earache radiating to the chin, swelling of the sides of the neck.
BLADDER
Main channel
Fever and aversion to cold, headache, stiff neck, pain in the
lower/upper back, difficulty in bending the back, difficulty in
flexing the knee, swelling and pain of the eyes, nosebleed, pain
behind the leg along the channel, pain in the foot and the external
aspect of the ankle, a feeling of fullness and pain of the
hypogastrium.
Connecting channel
Empty
Runny nose, nosebleed.
Full
Stuffy nose, headache, backache, neck ache, shoulder ache.
Muscle channel
Pain and stiffness of the muscles of the little toe, foot, heel, knee
and spine, backache and spasm of the back, stiff neck, inability to
raise the shoulder, stiffness of the muscles of the axillary region,
inability to twist the waist.
KIDNEYS
Main channel
Pain in the lower back, pain and a feeling of heat in the sole of the
foot, pain and numbness along the channel (inner aspect of the
ankle, foot, shin, knee, or thigh), swelling and pain of the throat,
2269
chest pain, breathlessness, dry throat, decreased vision, dizziness,
tinnitus, dark complexion, cold feet.
Connecting channel
Empty
Lower backache.
Full
Mental restlessness, depression, retention of urine, pain in the
heart region, distension and fullness of the chest.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles of the toes, foot, or inner
aspect of the ankle, stiffness of the muscles of the spine and neck,
inability to bend forward (if the muscles of the back are affected),
inability to bend backwards (if the muscles of the chest are
affected, convulsions (arching of the back).
PERICARDIUM
Main channel
Stiff neck, pain along the course of the channel, contraction of
elbow or hand, a feeling of heat in the palm, a feeling of fullness
and pain of the chest, swelling in the axilla, red face.
Connecting channel
Empty
Stiffness of the head.
Full
Pain in the heart region, mental restlessness.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles of the palms, or inner
2270
aspect of arm, elbow and axilla, pain in the heart region.
TRIPLE BURNER
Main channel
Numbness and pain along the course of the channel (fingers,
wrist, elbow, or shoulder), alternation of chills and fever, deafness,
tinnitus, dry throat, swelling and pain of the throat, pain in the
outer canthus of the eye, 
red eyes, pain around the ear, discharge
from the ear, swelling and pain of the cheeks, pain in the jaw,
temporal headache, dizziness.
Connecting channel
Empty
Loosening of the elbow joint.
Full
Contraction of the elbow, swollen and painful throat, dry mouth,
pain of the outer aspect of the arm, inability to raise the arm.
Muscle channel
Sprain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles of the ring finger, wrist,
elbow, upper arm, shoulder and neck, curling of the tongue.
GALL-BLADDER
Main channel
Alternation of chills and fever, temporal headache, deafness, pain
in the hip, pain along the course of the channel (lateral aspect of
thigh, knee, shin, or ankle), pain and distension of the breasts,
pain in the eye, inability to raise the foot, dizziness and tinnitus,
bitter taste, sighing, swelling of the sides of the neck, swelling and
pain below the axilla, shoulder pain, hypochondrial pain.
2271
Connecting channel
Empty
Weakness and flaccidity of the foot muscles, cold feet, paralysis of
the legs, difficulty in standing.
Full
Fainting, hypochondrial pain.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles of the fourth toe, external
aspect of the ankle, or lateral aspect of leg and knee, difficulty in
bending the knees, paralysis of the legs, chest and hypochondrial
pain, inability to open the eyes.
LIVER
Main channel
Headache, pain and swelling of the eye, cramps in the legs, pain
and numbness along the course of the channel (big toe, inner
aspect of ankle, shin, knee, or thigh), pain in the genitals, hernia,
abdominal pain, urinary difficulty, hypochondrial pain and
distension, blurred vision, dry throat.
Connecting channel
Empty
Itching of the genital region, impotence.
Full
Swelling and pain of the testicles, colic, abnormal erection, hernia.
Muscle channel
Pain, stiffness and sprain of the muscles of the big toe, inner
aspect of the ankle and leg, impotence, contraction of the scrotum
or vagina, priapism (persistent erection).
2272
CHAPTER
110
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY
VESSELS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
GOVERNING VESSEL (DU MAI)
DIRECTING VESSEL (REN MAI)
PENETRATING VESSEL (CHONG MAI)
COMBINED DIRECTING AND PENETRATING VESSEL
PATTERNS
Directing and Penetrating Vessels Empty
2273
Directing and Penetrating Vessels unstable
Directing and Penetrating Vessels deficient and
cold
Blood stasis in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Blood stasis and Dampness in the Directing
and Penetrating Vessels
Full-Heat in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Empty-Heat in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Damp-Heat in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Stagnant Heat in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Full-Cold in the Directing and Penetrating
Vessels
Uterus deficient and cold
Dampness and Phlegm in the Uterus
Stagnant Cold in the Uterus
Fetus Heat
Fetus Cold
Blood rebelling upwards after childbirth
GIRDLE VESSEL (DAI MAI)
YIN HEEL VESSEL (YIN QIAO MAI)
YANG HEEL VESSEL (YANG QIAO MAI)
YIN LINKING VESSEL (YIN WEI MAI)
YANG LINKING VESSEL (YANG WEI MAI)
2274
INTRODUCTION
For each extraordinary vessel, the applicable prescriptions will be
listed: the formulae indicated are general ones from Li Shi Zhen’s
‘Study of the Extraordinary Vessels’
 
1
 
while the ones for the
combined patterns of the Directing and Penetrating Vessels are
formulae specific to each pattern and are taken from ‘Diagnosis,
Patterns and Treatment in Chinese Medicine’.
 
2
 
As for
acupuncture, given the wide variety of symptoms pertaining to
each extraordinary vessel, only the opening points for each will be
mentioned. The herbs and prescriptions are from a Qing dynasty
book called ‘The Materia Medica of Proper Combinations’.
 
3
GOVERNING VESSEL (DU MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Stiffness and pain of the spine, backache, weak back, arching of
the back, headache, tremors, convulsions, epilepsy, prolapse of the
anus, blood in the stools, incontinence of urine, painful urination,
nocturnal emissions, impotence, irregular periods, infertility, dry
throat, poor memory, dizziness, tinnitus, depression, chills and
fever, manic behaviour.
Pulse
 
Floating and Long on all three positions of the left side.
Connecting channel
Stiffness of the back, a feeling of heaviness of the head, tremor of
the head.
Acupuncture
SI-3 Houxi and BL-62 Shenmai.
Herbs
Spine, Marrow, Brain
Lu Rong 
Cornu Cervi parvum
Lu Jiao 
Cornu Cervi
2275
Lu Jiao Shuang 
Cornu Cervi degelatinatum
Marrow of beef and goat
Yang channels, Bladder, Gall-Bladder
Fu Zi 
Radix Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
Qiang Huo 
Rhizoma seu Radix Notopterygii
Rou Gui 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
Du Huo 
Radix Angelicae pubescentis
Fang Feng 
Radix Ledebouriellae sesloidis
Jing Jie 
Herba seu Flos Schizonepetae tenuifoliae
Xi Xin 
Herba Asari cum radice
Gao Ben 
Rhizoma et Radix Ligustici sinensis
Cang Er Zi 
Fructus Xanthii
Gan Jiang 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
Chuan Jiao 
Pericarpium Zanthoxyli bungeani
Gui Zhi 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
Wu Tou 
Radix Aconiti carmichaeli
Prescription
None given, but any Kidney-Yang tonic prescription containing the
above herbs will strengthen the Governing Vessel.
DIRECTING VESSEL (REN MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Nocturnal emissions, incontinence of urine, retention of urine,
vaginal discharge, irregular periods, infertility, pain in the genital
region, epigastric and abdominal pain, abdominal masses,
menopausal symptoms (night sweating, hot flushes), problems
during pregnancy, amenorrhoea, oedema.
Pulse
 
Fine-Tight-Long on both Front positions.
Connecting channel
Pain and itching of the abdomen.
Acupuncture
2276
LU-7 Lieque and KI-6 Zhaohai.
Herbs
Uterus and Blood tonics
Gui Ban 
Plastrum Testudinis
Gui Ban Jiao 
Colla Plastri Testudinis
Bie Jia 
Carapacis Amydae sinensis
E Jiao 
Gelatinum Corii Asini
Zi He Che 
Placenta hominis
Zi Shi Ying 
Fluoritum
Ai Ye 
Folium Artemisiae Argyi
Clams.
Nourishing Yin and clearing Empty-Heat
Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae
Huang Bo 
Cortex Phellodendri
Xuan Shen 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
Sheng Di Huang 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
Gou Qi Zi 
Fructus Lycii
 
.
Prescription
Da Bu Yin Wan 
Great Tonifying the Yin Pill
 
.
PENETRATING VESSEL (CHONG MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Irregular periods, infertility, painful periods, vomiting and nausea,
‘internal urgency’ (
Li Ji,
 
feeling of anxiety), breathlessness,
abdominal pain and distension, a feeling of energy rising from the
abdomen to the chest, a feeling of tightness and pain of the
epigastrium and chest, palpitations, anxiety, a feeling of
obstruction in the throat, a feeling of heat in the face, cold and
numb feet with purple colour, umbilical pain, premenstrual
tension, breast distension, breast nodules, menopausal symptoms
(hot flushes, anxiety, palpitations), morning sickness, spontaneous
2277
bruising, nosebleed, fungal infections of the big toe.
Pulse
 
Deep and Firm on all three positions of either side, or
Deep and Firm on both Middle positions, or Wiry on both Middle
positions.
Acupuncture
SP-4 Gongsun and P-6 Neiguan.
Herbs
Uterus tonics
Gui Ban 
Plastrum Testudinis
Bie Jia 
Carapacis Amydae sinensis
E Jiao 
Gelatinum Corii Asini
Zi He Che 
Placenta hominis
 
.
Rebellious Qi
Yan Hu Suo 
Rhizoma Corydalis Yanhusuo
Chuan Lian Zi 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
Xiang Fu 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
Yu Jin 
Tuber Curcumae
Chen Xiang 
Lignum Aquilariae
Tao Ren 
Semen Persicae
Dang Gui 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
Qing Pi 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viridae
Wu Zhu Yu 
Fructus Evodiae rutaecarpae
Cong Bai 
Herba Allii fistulosi
Xiao Hui Xiang 
Fructus Foeniculi vulgaris
Chong Wei Zi 
Semen Leonurus heterophylli
Wu Yao 
Radix Linderae Strychnifoliae
 
.
Prescription
None given.
COMBINED DIRECTING AND
PENETRATING VESSEL PATTERNS
2278
Directing And Penetrating Vessels Empty
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Delayed cycle, scanty periods, amenorrhoea, infertility.
Other manifestations
Dull, pale complexion, dizziness, blurred vision, tiredness,
depression, backache, weakness of the back and knees, decreased
libido.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep and Weak, especially on both Rear positions.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the right, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, BL-23 Shenshu. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Da Bu Yuan Jian 
Great Tonifying the Origin Decoction
Gui Shen Wan 
Tonifying the Kidneys Pill
Shou Tai Wan 
Fetus Longevity Pill.
Directing And Penetrating Vessels Unstable
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Early periods, shortened cycle, heavy periods, irregular periods,
persistent, chronic vaginal discharge, miscarriage, persistent
lochial discharge after childbirth.
Other manifestations
Dull-pale complexion, depression, backache, weak knees, a
bearing-down feeling, frequent urination, incontinence of urine,
urination at night.
Tongue
 
Pale.
2279
Pulse
 
Deep and Weak especially on both Rear positions.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the right, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, BL-23 Shenshu, Du-20 Baihui, Ren-6 Qihai,
extra point Zigong. Moxa is applicable.
Prescription
Gu Chong Tang 
Consolidating the Penetrating Vessel Decoction
An Chong Tang 
Calming the Penetrating Vessel Decoction
Yi Qi Gu Chong Tang 
Benefiting Qi and Consolidating the
Penetrating Vessel Decoction
Bu Shen Gu Chong Wan 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Consolidating
the Penetrating Vessel Pill
Lu Jiao Tu Si Zi Wan 
Cornus Cervi-Cuscuta Pill
 
.
Directing And Penetrating Vessels Deficient
And Cold
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Early or late periods, abdominal pain, amenorrhoea, infertility, dull
abdominal pain after childbirth, prolonged trickling after the
period, pale and dilute menstrual blood.
Other manifestations
Dull abdominal pain alleviated by pressure and the application of
heat, cold limbs, a feeling of cold, a pronounced feeling of cold
during the period, decreased libido.
Tongue
 
Pale and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep, Weak and Slow.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the right, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, BL-23 Shenshu, extra point Zigong. Moxa
must be used.
2280
Prescription
Wen Jing Tan 
Warming the Menses Decoction
Dang Gui Jian Zhong Tang 
Angelica Warming the Centre Decoction
Wen Shen Tiao Qi Tang 
Warming the Kidneys and Regulating Qi
Decoction
Yu Yun Tang 
Promoting Pregnancy Decoction
Bu Shen Yang Xue Tang 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Nourishing
Blood Decoction
 
.
Blood Stasis In The Directing And
Penetrating Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Irregular cycle, brown spotting before the period, painful periods
with dark blood and clots, amenorrhoea (from blood stasis),
infertility, retention of lochia after childbirth.
Other manifestations
Lower abdominal pain, umbilical pain, pain and distension of the
breasts, anxiety, irritability, mental restlessness, tendency to worry,
breast lumps, abdominal masses.
Tongue
 
Purple.
Pulse
 
Wiry or Choppy.
Acupuncture
SP-4 Gongsun on the right and P-6 Neiguan on the left, KI-14
Siman, ST-29 Guilai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-3 Taichong, KI-5
Shuiquan.
Prescription
Xiao Yao San 
Free and Easy Wanderer Powder
Yue Ju Wan 
Ligusticum-Gardenia Pill
Wu Yao San 
Lindera Powder
Ge Xia Zhu Tang 
Eliminating Stasis below the Diaphragm Decoction
Gui Zhi Fu Ling Wan 
Ramulus-Cinnamomi-Puria Pill
2281
Xiang Leng Wan 
Aucklandia-Sparganium Pill
 
.
Blood Stasis And Dampness In The Directing
And Penetrating Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Irregular cycle, heavy periods, dark menstrual blood with clots,
brown spotting before the period, painful periods, chronic vaginal
discharge, abdominal masses, ovarian cysts, endometriosis,
infertility.
Other manifestations
Lower abdominal pain, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen.
Tongue
 
Purple, Swollen with sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Wiry and Slippery.
Acupuncture
SP-4 Gongsun on the right and P-6 Neiguan on the left, KI-14
Siman, ST-29 Guilai, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-3 Taichong, KI-5
Shuiquan, SP-9 Yinlingquan, ST-28 Shuidao, Ren-3 Zhongji, BL-22
Sanjiaoshu.
Prescription
Tao Hong Si Wu Tang 
Prunus-Carthamus Four Substances Decoction
Shao Fu Zhu Yu Tang 
Lower Abdomen Eliminating Stasis Decoction
San Miao Hong Teng Tang 
Three Wonderful Sargentodoxa Decoction
Qing Re Tiao Xue Tang 
Clearing Heat and Regulating Blood
Decoction
Cang Fu Dao Tan Wan 
Atractylodes-Cyperus Conducting Phlegm
Pill
Yin Jia Wan 
Lonicera-Amyda Pill
 
.
Full-Heat In The Directing And Penetrating
Vessels
2282
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Early cycle, heavy periods, bright-red or dark-red menstrual blood,
flooding and trickling, mid-cycle bleeding, nosebleed during the
period, profuse lochial discharge after childbirth, fever after
childbirth.
Other manifestations
Red face, a feeling of heat, thirst, irritability, insomnia.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid-Overflowing, Full at the middle level.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left, LI-11 Quchi,
SP-10 Xuehai, Ren-3 Zhongji, LIV-3 Taichong, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Qing Jing Tang 
Clearing the Menses Powder
Bao Yin Jian 
Protecting the Yin Decoction
Qing Re Gu Jing Tang 
Clearing Heart and Consolidating the
Menses Decoction
Qing Gan Yin Jing Tang 
Clearing the Liver and Guiding the Period
Decoction
Jie Du Huo Xue Tang 
Expelling Poison and Invigorating Blood
Decoction
Jing Fang Si Wu Tang 
Schizonepeta-Ledebouriella Four Substances
Decoction
 
.
Empty-Heat In The Directing And Penetrating
Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Early cycle, long periods, trickling after the period, mid-cycle
bleeding, scanty or heavy periods.
2283
Other manifestations
A feeling of heat in the afternoon, malar flush, night sweating,
five-palm heat, insomnia, mental restlessness, dry throat at night.
Tongue
 
Red without coating.
Pulse
 
Floating-Empty or Fine and Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-2 Rangu, SP-6 Sanyinjiao.
Prescription
Liang Di Tang 
Two ‘Di’ Decoction
Yi Yin Jian 
One Yin Decoction.
Damp-Heat In The Directing And Penetrating
Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Excessive yellow or red sticky vaginal discharge with offensive
odour, mid-cycle bleeding/pain, heavy periods, painful periods,
long periods.
Other manifestations
Abdominal pain, a feeling of heaviness in the abdomen, pain on
urination, mucus in the stools, a feeling of heat, low-grade fever,
cloudy urine.
Tongue
 
Sticky yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery and Rapid.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left, Ren-3
Zhongji, ST-28 Shuidao, Ren-9 Shuifen, SP-9 Yinlingquan, SP-6
Sanyinjiao, LI-11 Quchi, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu.
2284
Prescription
Zhi Dai Wan 
Stopping Vaginal Discharge Pill
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
 
.
Stagnant Heat In The Directing And
Penetrating Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Early cycle, scanty or heavy periods, premenstrual tension, periods
stopping and starting, red clots.
Other manifestations
Abdominal distension, breast distension, irritability, propensity to
outbursts of anger, a feeling of heat, dry throat.
Tongue
 
Red sides.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
This is Heat deriving from long-term stagnation of Qi.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left if the pulse
is Wiry, or SP-4 Gongsun on the right and P-6 Neiguan on the left if
the pulse is Firm, LIV-3 Taichong, Ren-6 Qihai, KI-14 Siman, LIV-2
Xingjian, LIV-14 Qimen.
Prescription
Dan Zhi Xiao Yao San 
Moutan-Gardenia Free and Easy Wanderer
Powder
Hua Gan Jian 
Transforming the Liver Decoction.
Full-Cold In The Directing And Penetrating
Vessels
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
2285
Delayed cycle, painful periods with severe cramping pain and a
pronounced feeling of cold during the period, bright-red blood
with small dark clots, infertility, abdominal pain after childbirth.
Other manifestations
Abdominal pain that is aggravated by pressure and alleviated by
the application of heat, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, bright-white
complexion.
Tongue
 
Pale or Bluish-Purple.
Pulse
 
Deep, Slow, Tight.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left, Ren-4
Guanyuan, Ren-3 Zhongji, ST-28 Shuidao, KI-14 Siman, extra point
Zigong, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, KI-5 Shuiquan. Moxa must
be used.
Prescription
Shao Fu Zhu Yu Tang 
Lower Abdomen Eliminating Stasis Decoction
Wen Jing Tang 
Warming the Menses Decoction
Suo Gong Zhu Yu Tang 
Contracting the Uterus and Eliminating
Stasis Decoction
 
.
Uterus Deficient And Cold
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Irregular cycle, scanty period, painful period with dull pain that is
alleviated by the application of heat, excessive vaginal discharge,
infertility, miscarriage, threatened miscarriage, abdominal pain
during childbirth, retention of lochia after childbirth.
Other manifestations
Chronic dull, lower abdominal pain that is alleviated by pressure
and the application of heat, a soft feeling of the abdomen on
palpation, a feeling of cold, cold limbs, loose stools, frequent and
2286
pale urination.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep and Weak.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the right, Ren-4
Guanyuan, KI-13 Qixue, BL-23 Shenshu, extra point Zigong. Moxa
must be used.
Prescription
Ai Fu Nuan Gong Wan 
Artemisia-Cyperus Warming the Uterus Pill
Wen Jing Tang 
Warming the Menses Decoction
Nei Bu Wan 
Inner Tonification Pill
Sheng Hua Tang 
Generating and Resolving Decoction
Shou Jiao Ai Tang 
Longevity Colla Corii Asini-Artemisia Decoction
Dampness And Phlegm In The Uterus
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Delayed cycle, amenorrhoea, scanty or heavy periods, excessive
vaginal discharge, infertility, ovarian cysts, myomas, polycystic
ovary syndrome, phantom pregnancy.
Other manifestations
Abdominal pain, a feeling of heaviness in the abdomen, a feeling
of oppression of the chest, sputum in the throat, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, weariness, loose stools, dull-pale
complexion, overweight.
Tongue
 
Swollen with a sticky coating.
Pulse
 
Slippery.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaihai on the left, Ren-3
Zhongji, ST-28 Shuidao, extra point Zigong, Ren-9 Shuifen, SP-9
Yinlingquan, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, BL-22 Sanjiaoshu.
2287
Prescription
Cang Fu Dao Tan Wan 
Atractylodes-Cyperus Conducting Phlegm Pill
Wei Ling Tang 
Stomach ‘Ling’ Decoction
Wan Dai Tang 
Ending Vaginal Discharge Decoction
Qi Gong Wan 
Arousing the Uterus Pill
Tiao Zheng San 
Regulating the Upright Powder
 
.
Stagnant Cold In The Uterus
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Delayed cycle, painful periods with severe cramps, dark menstrual
blood with clots, brown spotting before the period, periods
stopping and starting, abdominal pain after childbirth, retention
of lochia after childbirth, white vaginal discharge, a feeling of cold
in the vagina, infertility.
Other manifestations
Abdominal pain that is aggravated by pressure and alleviated by
the application of heat, a feeling of cold in the abdomen, a general
feeling cold, cold limbs, purple lips.
Tongue
 
Bluish-Purple and wet.
Pulse
 
Deep-Wiry-Slow or Deep-Choppy-Slow.
Acupuncture
LU-7 Lieque on the right and KI-6 Zhaohai on the left if the pulse
is Choppy, or SP-4 Gongsun on the right and P-6 Neiguan on the
left if the pulse is Wiry, KI-14 Siman, ST-29 Guilai, Ren-6 Qihai, SP-
10 Xuehai, ST-36 Zusanli, SP-6 Sanyinjiao, LIV-3 Taichong. Moxa
should be used.
Prescription
Wen Jing Tang 
Warming the Menses Decoction
Shao Fu Zhu Yu Tang 
Lower Abdomen Eliminating Stasis Decoction
Sheng Hua Tang 
Generating and Resolving Decoction
Ai Fu Nuan Gong Wan 
Artemisia-Cyperus Warming the Uterus
2288
Pill
Hei Shen San 
Black [Bean] Spirit Powder
 
.
Fetus Heat
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy, threatened miscarriage,
mental restlessness during pregnancy, a history of miscarriages.
Other manifestations
Red face, a feeling of heat, thirst, abdominal pain, insomnia,
mental restlessness, mouth ulcers.
Tongue
 
Red with yellow coating.
Pulse
 
Rapid and Overflowing.
Acupuncture
LI-11 Quchi, SP-10 Xuehai, KI-2 Rangu, LIV-2 Xingjian, P-7 Daling,
P-3 Quze.
Prescription
Bao Yin Jian 
Protecting Yin Decoction
Gu Tai Jian 
Consolidating the Fetus Decoction
Qing Hai Wan 
Clearing the Sea Pill
Qing Re An Tai Yin 
Clearing Heat and Calming the Fetus Decoction
.
Fetus Cold
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Threatened miscarriage, fetus not growing, miscarriage, a history
of miscarriages.
Other manifestations
2289
A feeling of cold, cold limbs, sour regurgitation, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, loose stools.
Tongue
 
Pale.
Pulse
 
Deep and Slow.
Acupuncture
ST-36 Zusanli, BL-23 Shenshu, KI-9 Zhubin. Moxa must be used.
Prescription
Li Yin Jian 
Regulating Yin Decoction
Chang Tai Bai Zhu San 
Long [Life] Fetus Atractylodes Powder
Bu Shen Gu Chong Wan 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Consolidating
the Penetrating Vessel Pill
Bu Shen An Tai Yin 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Calming the Fetus
Decoction
 
.
Blood Rebelling Upwards After Childbirth
Clinical manifestations
Gynaecological manifestations
Retention of lochia or scanty lochia after childbirth.
Other manifestations
Mental restlessness, manic behaviour, nosebleed, vomiting of
blood, red face, coughing of blood, abdominal pain, dark
complexion, stiff joints, clenched teeth.
Tongue
 
Purple.
Pulse
 
Wiry.
Acupuncture
SP-4 Gongsun on the right and P-6 Neiguan on the left, KI-14
Siman, SP-10 Xuehai, ST-29 Guilai, LIV-3 Taichong, SP-6 Sanyinjiao,
Ren-3 Zhongji, LIV-1 Dadun, SP-1 Yinbai, P-7 Daling.
Prescription
Duo Ming San 
Seizing Life Powder
2290
Sheng Hua Tang 
Generating and Resolving Decoction
Wu Zhi San 
Five Citrus Powder
Di Sheng Tang 
Supporting the Sage Decoction
Fo Shou San 
Buddha’s Hand Powder
 
.
GIRDLE VESSEL (DAI MAI)
Clinical manifestations
A feeling of cold and pain of the middle and lower back, mid-back
pain radiating to the abdomen, abdominal pain radiating to the
middle of the back, flaccidity and weakness of the lower back,
abdominal distension, chronic vaginal discharge, prolapse of the
uterus, weakness and atrophy of the lower limbs, miscarriage, cold
feet, amenorrhoea, irregular periods, a feeling of cold in the
genital area, infertility, nocturnal emissions, umbilical pain,
painful periods (from Dampness), a feeling of fullness of the
abdomen, a feeling of the 
back as if sitting in water, a feeling of
heaviness of the body, a feeling of heaviness of the abdomen as if
wearing a belt ‘carrying 5000 coins’, hernia.
Pulse
 
Wiry on both Middle positions.
Acupuncture
GB-41 Zulinqi and TB-5 Waiguan.
Herbs
Astringent herbs which infuse to the Lower Burner
Wu Wei Zi 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
Shan Yao 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
Qian Shi 
Semen Euryales ferocis
Fu Pen Zi 
Fructus Rubi
Sang Piao Xiao 
Ootheca mantidis
 
.
Herbs which consolidate the Uterus and lift Qi
Dang Gui 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
Bai Shao 
Radix Paeoniae albae
2291
Xu Duan 
Radix Dipsaci
Long Gu 
Os Draconis
Ai Ye 
Folium Artemisiae
Sheng Ma 
Rhizoma Camicifugae
Gan Cao 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
.
Prescription
Gan Jiang Ling Zhu Tang 
Glycyrrhiza-Zingiberis-Poria-Atractylodes
Decoction
Dan Gui Shao Yao San 
Angelica-Paeonia Powder
Liang Shou Tang 
Two Receiving Decoction
Variation of Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang 
Tonifying the Centre and
Benefiting Qi Decoction
 
plus Ba Ji Tian 
Radix Morindae officinalis
 
, Du
Zhong 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
, Gou Ji 
Rhizoma Cibotii Barometz,
Xu Duan 
Radix Dipsaci Asperi
 
, Wu Wei Zi 
Fructus Schisandrae
chinensis
Shou Tai Wan 
Fetus Longevity Pill
 
.
YIN HEEL VESSEL (YIN QIAO MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Sleepiness, epilepsy (seizures at night), pain in the back and hip
radiating to the groin and genitals, hypogastric pain, tremors of
the legs, foot turning inwards, abdominal pain, tightness of the
muscles of the inner aspect of the leg and flaccidity of those of the
outer aspect, abdominal masses, myomas, difficult delivery,
retention of placenta.
Pulse
 
Wiry on both Rear positions.
Acupuncture
KI-6 Zhaohai and LU-7 Lieque.
Herbs
Yan Hu Suo 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
Gua Lou 
Fructus Trichosanthis
Ban Xia 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
2292
Dan Nan Xing 
Rhizoma Arisaematis praeparata
Zhi Mu 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
Huang Bo 
Cortex Phellodendri
Yuan Zhi 
Radix Polygalea tenufoliae
Suan Zao Ren 
Semen Ziziphi spinosae
Shi Chang Pu 
Rhizoma Acori graminea
 
.
Prescription
Si Wu Tang 
Four Substances Decoction
Ban Xia Tang 
Pinellia Decoction
YANG HEEL VESSEL (YANG QIAO
MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Insomnia, epilepsy (seizures during the day), pain and redness of
the inner corner of the eye, backache, sciatica with pain along the
lateral aspect of the leg, tremor of the legs, foot turning outwards,
tightness of the muscles of the outer aspect of the leg and
flaccidity of those of the inner aspect, Wind-stroke, hemiplegia,
aphasia, facial paralysis, severe dizziness, chills and fever,
headache, stiff neck, manic behaviour, manic depression, fright,
‘seeing ghosts’, inability to raise the leg when lying down.
Pulse
 
Wiry on both Front positions.
Acupuncture
BL-62 Shenmai and SI-3 Houxi.
Herbs
Ma Huang 
Herba Ephedrae
Fang Feng 
Radix Ledebouriellae sesloidis
Cang Zhu 
Rhizoma Atractylodis lanceae
Zhi Gan Cao 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
Fang Ji 
Radix Stephaniae tetrandae
 
.
2293
Prescription
Sheng Yang Tang 
Raising the Yang Decoction
 
.
YIN LINKING VESSEL (YIN WEI MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Pain in the heart region, fullness and pain of the chest and
hypochondrium, pain in the kidney region, dryness of the throat,
anxiety, insomnia, pensiveness, obsessive thoughts, lack of will-
power, loss of self-control, depression, sadness, a feeling of a knot
in the chest which feels tight and full on palpation, melancholy,
crying, forgetfulness, mental cloudiness, palpitations, shock.
Pulse
 
Wiry on the lateral side of the Rear position extending
towards the medial side of the front position (
Fig. 110.1
 
).
2294
FIG. 110.1
 
Yin and Yang Linking Vessels pulses
Acupuncture
P-6 Neiguan and SP-4 Gongsun.
Herbs
2295
Dang Gui 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
Chuan Xiong 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
.
Prescription
Dang Gui Si Ni Tang 
Angelica Four Rebellious Decoction
Wu Zhu Yu Tang 
Evodia Decoction
Si Ni Tang 
Four Rebellious Decoction
Li Zhong Tang 
Regulating the Centre Decoction
 
.
YANG LINKING VESSEL (YANG WEI
MAI)
Clinical manifestations
Alternations of chills and fevers, weakness of the limbs, dizziness
on eye movement, earache, stiff neck, hypochondrial pain, pain in
the lateral side of the leg, tinnitus, deafness, sweating.
Pulse
 
Wiry on the medial side of the Rear position extending
towards the lateral side of the Front position (
Fig. 110.1
 
).
Acupuncture
TB-5 Waiguan and GB-41 Zulinqi.
Herbs
Gui Zhi 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
Bai Shao 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
Huang Qi 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
.
Prescription
Dang Gui Gui Zhi Tang 
Angelica-Ramulus-Cinnamomi Decoction
 
.
NOTES
1. 
Zhen, Wang Luo A Compilation of the ‘Study of the Eight
Extraordinary Vessels’ (
Qi Jing Ba Mai Kao Jiao Zhu
 
). Shanghai Science Publishing House, Shanghai, 1985. The
2296
‘Study of the Eight Extraordinary Vessels’ (
Qi Jing Ba Mai
Kao
 
 
) by Li Shi Zhen was published in 1578.
2. 
En, Cheng Shao. Diagnosis, Patterns and Treatment in
Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Zheng Hou Zhen Duan Zhi Liao
Xue
 
). Beijing: Beijing Science Publishing House, 1994; 241–
278.
3. 
The Materia Medica of Proper Combinations (
De Pei Ben
Cao
 
) reported in Wang Luo Zhen 1985 A Compilation of
the ‘Study of the Eight Extraordinary Vessels’ (
Qi Jing Ba
Mai Kao Jiao Zh
 
), Shanghai Science Publishing House,
Shanghai pp. 129–131. The ‘Study of the Eight
Extraordinary Vessels’ (
Qi Jing Ba Mai Kao
 
) by Li Shi Zhen
was published in 1578
2297
CHAPTER
111
 
IDENTIFICATION
OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO
THE FIVE
ELEMENTS
CHAPTER CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
GENERATING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
Wood not generating Fire
Fire not generating Earth
Earth not generating Metal
Metal not generating Water
Water not generating Wood
OVERACTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
2298
Wood overacting on Earth
Earth overacting on Water
Water overacting on Fire
Fire overacting on Metal
Metal overacting on Wood
INSULTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
Wood insulting Metal
Metal insulting Fire
Fire insulting Water
Water insulting Earth
Earth insulting Wood
INTRODUCTION
The identification of patterns according to the Five Elements is
based on the pathological changes occurring in dysfunctions of the
Generating, Overacting and Insulting sequences of the Five
Elements.
These patterns are not of primary importance in practice as most
of them describe clinical conditions which are better expressed by
the Internal Organ patterns. In certain cases, however, some Five-
Element patterns can describe conditions which fall outside the
scope of the Internal Organ patterns. An example of this is the
pattern of deficient Qi of Wood (manifesting with timidity and
indecision), which is not included among the Internal Organ
patterns.
We can distinguish the Five-Element patterns according to the
Generating, Overacting and Insulting sequences.
GENERATING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
These patterns describe conditions of deficiency of each organ
2299
when this is induced by its Mother Element.
Wood Not Generating Fire
This pattern is sometimes also described as a pattern of deficient
Gall-Bladder. It is an unusual pattern in so far as, according to the
theory of the Internal Organs, Liver-Qi or the Gall-Bladder can
hardly ever be deficient. This pattern describes such a situation.
More than a pattern, it really describes a certain character and
personality, and its salient feature 
is the lack of courage and
timidity. It corresponds to the Internal Organ pattern of deficient
Gall-Bladder. It is also associated with Liver-Qi deficiency.
Clinical manifestations
Timidity, a lack of courage, indecision, palpitations and insomnia
(in particular, waking up in the early hours of the morning).
Fire Not Generating Earth
This pattern basically describes a condition of Spleen-Yang
deficiency due to failure of Fire in providing Heat to the Spleen to
transform and transport. According to the theory of the Internal
Organs, however, the Spleen derives the warmth necessary to its
functions not from the Heart, but from Kidney-Yang.
Clinical manifestations
Loose stools, chilliness and weakness of the limbs.
Earth Not Generating Metal
This pattern describes the situation when a Spleen deficiency
(causing the tiredness) leads to the formation of Phlegm, which
obstructs the Lungs.
Clinical manifestations
Phlegm in the chest, cough and tiredness.
2300
Metal Not Generating Water
This pattern corresponds to the Internal Organ pattern of Kidneys
not receiving Qi.
Clinical manifestations
Cough, breathlessness, loss of voice and asthma.
Water Not Generating Wood
This pattern is the same as the Internal Organ pattern of Kidney
and Liver Yin deficiency.
Clinical manifestations
Dizziness, blurred vision, headaches and vertigo.
OVERACTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
Wood Overacting On Earth
The pattern of Wood overacting on Earth is very common and it is
exactly the same as the pattern of Liver invading the Spleen or
Stomach.
Clinical manifestations
Hypochondrial and epigastric pain, a feeling of distension,
irritability, loose stools, poor appetite and a greenish face.
When the clinical manifestations pertain to one Element and the
face colour pertains to the Element which overacts on it, the face
colour usually shows the origin of the disharmony. In this case,
loose stools and poor appetite are symptoms of deficiency of Earth
(Spleen) but the face is greenish: this indicates that the root of the
problem is in Wood, that is, Wood overacting on Earth. The same
principle applies to all the following cases of disharmony of the
Overacting sequence.
Earth Overacting On Water
2301
This pattern occurs when a deficient Spleen fails to transform and
transport fluids, which accumulate and obstruct the Kidney’s
function of transformation and excretion of fluids.
Clinical manifestations
Oedema, difficult urination and a yellow face.
Water Overacting On Fire
There is no such pattern as the Kidneys cannot be in Excess.
Fire Overacting On Metal
This pattern corresponds to Full-Heat in the Lungs.
Clinical manifestations
Cough with profuse yellow sputum, a feeling of heat and a red
face.
Metal Overacting On Wood
Clinical manifestations
Tiredness, irritability, a feeling of distension and a white face.
INSULTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
Wood Insulting Metal
The Liver channel influences the chest and stagnant Liver-Qi or
Liver-Fire can obstruct the chest and prevent Lung-Qi from
descending.
Clinical manifestations
Cough, asthma and a feeling of distension of chest and
hypochondrium.
Metal Insulting Fire
2302
This pattern basically describes a condition of both Lung- and
Heart-Qi deficiency.
Clinical manifestations
Palpitations, insomnia and breathlessness.
Fire Insulting Water
This pattern is identical to the Internal Organ pattern of ‘Kidney
and Heart not harmonized’, that is, Kidney-Yin deficiency giving
rise to Heart Empty-Heat.
Clinical manifestations
Malar flush, dry mouth at night, insomnia, dizziness, lower
backache and night sweating.
Water Insulting Earth
This pattern corresponds to Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency.
Clinical manifestations
Loose stools, oedema, tiredness and weakness of the limbs.
Earth Insulting Wood
This pattern is caused by a failure of the Spleen in transforming
fluids leading to Dampness. Dampness accumulates and obstructs
the smooth flow of Liver-Qi, impeding the free flow of bile.
Clinical manifestations
Jaundice, hypochondrial pain and distension.
2303
 
APPENDICES
2304
APPENDIX 1
CASE HISTORIES
There are two types of case histories in this appendix: the first
group includes case histories written in a very detailed way to
show the thinking process behind the interrogation of the patient
and how the interrogation is integrated with observation.
The second group of case histories is used to illustrate
important guidelines in diagnosis and treatment principle.
 
Group 1
Case history 1
A 41-year-old woman had been trying to conceive
unsuccessfully for 1 year.
Observation:
 
As the patient is talking, observation of
her complexion and eyes is the first diagnostic clue. Her
complexion is dull-pale tending to yellow, slightly
without lustre and with several skin spots (pale
papules). Her eyes do have lustre and her hair has a
good sheen.
Deduction:
 
The yellow colour and consistency of the
complexion indicate the presence of Dampness and its
dullness indicates that it occurs against a background
of Spleen deficiency.
Listening:
 
Her voice is fairly strong although it
sounds slightly sad.
Deduction:
 
The strength of her voice indicates that
Lung-Qi is good and that, if there is a Qi deficiency, it
does not involve the Lungs and it is therefore not too
severe. However, the slightly sad tone of her voice
indicates a Lung pattern due to sadness; the fact that
the voice is strong indicates that, whatever the
emotional problem, it is of short duration. In fact, she
2305
confirmed that she had moved to London recently from
the United States and that she had been under some
stress in trying to adapt to a new job and a new
lifestyle.
Question:
 
‘Have you ever been pregnant?’ [Since the
patient is complaining of infertility, it is important to
ask whether she has ever been pregnant: if she has
never been pregnant, which is called 
primary infertility
 
,
this suggests a deeper disharmony than that of a
woman who cannot conceive again after having had one
child.]
Answer:
 
‘I was pregnant once 18 years ago but I had
a termination and have used contraception from that
time until 1 year ago.’
Question:
 
‘Do your periods come regularly?’ [At this
point, it is crucial to ask about her menstrual cycle, i.e.
the regularity of it, the amount of bleeding, the colour
of the menstrual blood, pain and any premenstrual
symptoms. These questions are important to get a
preliminary idea of the main patterns involved.]
Answer:
 
‘The periods are regular, coming every 28–30
days.’
Question:
 
‘How many days do they last?’
Answer:
 
‘4 to 5 days.’
Question:
 
‘Are they particularly heavy?’
Answer:
 
‘No, they are not too heavy.’
Question:
 
‘What colour is the blood?’
Answer:
 
‘Dark red.’
Deduction:
 
The regularity of the menstrual cycle, the
duration of the period itself and the colour of the
menstrual blood are all normal and do not point to any
pattern yet.
Question:
 
‘Do you have any premenstrual problems?’
Answer:
 
‘No, not really.’
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from lower backache?’ [I
now begin to ask a series of questions to establish
whether there is a Kidney deficiency as this is the most
common cause of infertility.]
2306
Answer:
 
‘Only occasionally.’
Question:
 
‘Do you experience dizziness sometimes?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you experience ringing in the ears?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you experience night sweating?’
Answer:
 
‘Only occasionally but it might be due to the
fact that we have a very heavy duvet.’[Although she
suffers from occasional backache and night sweating,
which may be due to the bedding, there is not much
evidence of a Kidney deficiency.]
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from blurred vision?’ [I now
begin to ask a series of questions to establish whether
there is a Blood deficiency, another common Deficiency
pattern in infertility.]
Answer:
 
‘Occasionally.’
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from floaters?’
Answer:
 
‘Occasionally.’
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from tingling in the limbs?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘How is your sleep?’
Answer:
 
‘It is disturbed but it may be due to the
heavy traffic.’
Deduction:
 
There are a few symptoms of Liver-Blood
deficiency, i.e. the occasional blurred vision and
floaters.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from palpitations?’
[Whenever a woman suffers from a pattern of Liver-
Blood deficiency, I always ask questions to establish
whether this has given rise to Heart-Blood deficiency as
well.]
Answer:
 
‘Yes, occasionally.’
Deduction:
 
This confirms that there is some Heart-
Blood deficiency as well.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from any digestive
problems, for example, pain, fullness or bloating after
eating?’ [Having observed that her face indicates
Dampness against a background of Spleen deficiency, I
2307
ask about digestive symptoms to exclude or confirm
this. However, it is always necessary to ask about any
digestive symptoms to establish the state of the
Stomach and Spleen, whatever the patient’s main
complaint.]
Answer:
 
‘No, I have no digestive problems. My
appetite is good and my digestion is good.’
Question:
 
‘Do you have a bowel movement every
day?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes.’
Deduction:
 
This answer contradicts what was found
from observation, that is, Dampness with Spleen
deficiency. However, this is not at all unusual because
Dampness may settle in various parts of the body and
sometimes not involve digestion itself.
Question:
 
‘Do you have any other problems?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Are you on any medication?’ [One should
never forget to ask about medication because their side-
effects can account for some of the presenting
symptoms and signs.]
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Observation:
 
At this point I usually look at the
tongue before taking the pulse. The tongue is Red on
the sides, slightly Swollen and with a sticky yellow
coating.
Deduction:
 
The tongue appearance confirms the
presence of Dampness but it adds a new dimension to
the diagnosis in so far as, first of all, it does not show
any deficiency and, secondly, it indicates the clear
presence of Heat, which was not obvious from any of
the symptoms. The tongue shows the presence of
Damp-Heat in the Stomach and Spleen.
Question:
 
‘Are you sometimes thirsty?’ [I now begin
to ask questions to confirm or exclude the presence of
Damp-Heat in the digestive system.]
Answer:
 
‘Yes.’
Question:
 
‘Do you sometimes experience a strange
2308
taste in your mouth such as a sticky taste?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes.’
Question:
 
‘Do you experience a feeling of heaviness
or bearing down in your abdomen?’ [As the tongue
indicates Damp-Heat, I now go back to asking more
questions about the gynaecological system.]
Answer:
 
‘Yes, sometimes during the period.’
Question:
 
‘Do you sometimes suffer from mid-cycle
pain?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, occasionally.’
Deduction:
 
The sticky taste and thirst confirm the
presence of Damp-Heat in the Middle Burner, while the
mid-cycle pain and the bearing-down sensation indicate
the presence of Damp-Heat in the Lower Burner also.
Palpation:
 
The pulse shows no pronounced
Deficiency as it is relatively normal in strength and only
very slightly Slippery, confirming the presence of
Dampness. The Kidney positions on the pulse are not
Weak and this confirms that there is no pronounced
Kidney deficiency.
Conclusion:
 
Although the symptoms of blurred
vision, occasional floaters and palpitations indicate a
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency, this cannot be very
pronounced as it is not confirmed by other symptoms
or by the pulse. The prevailing pattern is that of Damp-
Heat in the Middle and Lower Burners and presumably
this is the cause of the infertility as Dampness may
obstruct the Uterus preventing implantation of the egg.
Although the Dampness was apparent from the
observation of the patient’s complexion, it was only
observation of the tongue which changed the whole
diagnosis in two ways. First, the tongue clearly
indicated that Dampness was a predominant
pathogenic factor and the overall condition was
dominated by Excess rather than Deficiency; secondly,
the tongue clearly indicated the presence of Heat,
which, although not initially apparent on interrogation,
was confirmed by the presence of thirst.
2309
The main implication of this case history is that often
observation of the tongue changes the diagnosis
entirely and leads us to ask further questions which we
may have omitted asking. The second important
implication of this case history is that one should
always keep an open mind during the diagnostic
process and never have preconceived ideas about the
causes of a condition and therefore jump to
conclusions. In this case, for example, had I not looked
at the tongue or misinterpreted it, it would have been
easy to jump to the conclusion that the main cause of
this patient’s infertility lies in Liver-Blood deficiency.
Case history 2
A 40-year-old woman had been trying to conceive
unsuccessfully for 18 months.
Observation:
 
Her complexion was very slightly red on
her cheeks and her eyes lacked lustre but to a very
slight degree.
Listening:
 
Her voice was strong and clear.
Question:
 
‘Do your periods come regularly?’ [At this
point, it is crucial to ask about her menstrual cycle, i.e.
the regularity of it, the amount of bleeding, the colour
of the menstrual blood, pain and any premenstrual
symptoms. These questions are important to get a
preliminary idea of the main patterns involved.]
Answer:
 
‘They come every 25 to 26 days.’
Deduction:
 
From a Chinese perspective, this would
be considered as a rather short cycle, the main causes of
which can be Qi deficiency or Blood-Heat.
Question:
 
‘How many days does your period last?’
Answer:
 
‘3 days.’
Question:
 
‘Would you say it is rather scanty?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, it is quite.’
Deduction:
 
The scanty and short period seems to
indicate Blood deficiency. As the period also comes
early, which may be due to Qi deficiency, this would
indicate a deficiency of Qi and Blood (unless of course
2310
the short cycle is due to Blood-Heat).
Question:
 
‘What colour is the blood?’
Answer:
 
‘Bright red.’
Question:
 
‘Is it painful?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, it was but it was greatly improved by
acupuncture treatment.’
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from any premenstrual
symptoms?’
Answer:
 
‘I did suffer from premenstrual breast
distension but that also was greatly improved by
acupuncture treatment.’
Deduction:
 
The period pain and the premenstrual
breast distension seem to indicate Liver-Qi stagnation.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from blurred vision or
floaters?’ [I now begin to ask questions to confirm or
exclude the presence of Blood deficiency indicated by
the short and scanty periods.]
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from dizziness?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question::
 
‘Do you experience tingling in your limbs
sometimes?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question::
 
‘Do you sleep well?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes.’
Deduction:
 
Apart from the short and scanty periods,
none of the other symptoms and signs confirm the
presence of Liver-Blood deficiency.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from lower backache?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you ever have a ringing sound in your
ears?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do your knees ever feel weak?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you ever suffer from night sweating?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Deduction:
 
The absence of any of these symptoms
2311
excludes the presence of a Kidney deficiency.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from any digestive
symptoms such as pain, fullness or bloating after
eating?’ [It is always necessary to ask this question to
establish the state of the Stomach and Spleen.]
Answer:
 
‘No, none at all.’
Question:
 
‘Do you have a bowel movement every
day?’
Answer:
 
‘I did suffer from some constipation but this
was also greatly improved by acupuncture treatment.’
Deduction:
 
The constipation could confirm either the
Blood deficiency or the Liver-Qi stagnation.
Observation:
 
At this point, I usually look at the
tongue and this revealed entirely new patterns which
were not obvious from interrogation. In fact, the tongue
was quite Red on the sides, had a very Red tip with red
points, it was Swollen and had a sticky yellow coating.
Deduction:
 
The tongue clearly indicates the presence
of Phlegm (because it is Swollen and has a sticky
coating) and of Heat (because it is Red on the sides and
tip). This is Phlegm-Heat affecting the Heart, which we
can deduce from the very Red tip with red points. To
confirm or exclude this pattern, one needs to ask
questions regarding a possible affliction of the Mind by
Phlegm.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from anxiety or have you
suffered from emotional problems in the recent or
distant past?’ [The slight dullness of her eyes would
seem to confirm the affliction of the Heart by Phlegm,
which was apparent from the tongue.]
Answer:
 
‘I do not suffer from anxiety but I do suffer
from severe mood swings.’
Deduction:
 
The presence of severe mood swings,
combined with the tongue appearance, confirms the
affliction of the Heart by Phlegm-Heat.
Palpation:
 
The pulse is Slippery on the whole and
slightly Overflowing on the left Front position.
Deduction:
 
The Slippery pulse quality confirms the
2312
presence of Phlegm, while the Overflowing quality on
the Heart position confirms that the Phlegm is located
in the Heart and that the Mind and Spirit are slightly
disturbed.
Conclusion:
 
The main presenting pattern is Phlegm-
Heat in the Heart. Although the patient suffers from
infertility, there is no Kidney deficiency, no Blood
deficiency and no evidence of Dampness or Phlegm
obstructing the Lower Burner. How does Phlegm-Heat
in the Heart affect fertility? The monthly menstrual
cycle is like a tide determined by the ebb and flow and
the mutual generation and consumption of Yin and
Yang. Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang are the source of
this Yin and Yang fluctuation in the monthly menstrual
cycle. Ovulation represents a transformation of Yin to
Yang, while menstruation represents a transformation
of Yang to Yin; although the Kidney-Yin and Kidney-
Yang are the source of the Yin and Yang in the
menstrual cycle, the Heart is the agent of
transformation of one into another. In particular, Heart-
Qi descends and communicates with the Kidneys to
control the discharge of eggs at ovulation and of
menstrual blood at menstruation.
This downward movement of the Heart in ovulation
and menstruation is another expression of the
harmonious communication between Heart and
Kidneys and Fire and Water. Heart-Fire (the
physiological Emperor Fire) needs to go down to the
Kidneys, while Kidney-Water needs to go up to the
Heart.
When Phlegm obstructs the Heart, it prevents its Qi
from descending to the Kidneys; pathological Fire
affecting the Heart goes up (in contrast to the
physiological Emperor Fire, which goes down to the
Kidneys) and therefore the Heart cannot effect the
transformation of Yin to Yang and vice versa, nor the
proper discharge of eggs at ovulation; this may
therefore cause infertility.
2313
Case history 3
A 50-year-old woman had been suffering from a
blocked nose, sneezing and intermittent wheezing. She
took Beconase, which helped to relieve her symptoms.
Observation:
 
She had a dull-pale complexion and her
head shook when she spoke.
Listening:
 
Her voice was very loud, almost shouting.
Deduction:
 
A dull-pale complexion points towards a
Blood deficiency. A shaking head points towards an
Excess pattern of the Liver, probably Liver-Wind. The
loud voice generally indicates an Excess pattern or, in
health, good Lung-Qi. However, her voice had quite a
high pitch with a trembling quality to it; this tends to
indicate nervous tension.
Question:
 
‘When did the problem start?’
Answer:
 
‘My nose has been blocked for the past 3 or
4 years. Before that I had about two asthma attacks
when I was about 40.’
Question:
 
‘Did these symptoms start after
childbirth?’ [I asked this question as childbirth may
weaken a woman’s Kidney energy and they may
consequently develop symptoms they have not suffered
from before. In this case, it was important to determine
whether childbirth had weakened the Kidney
Defensive-Qi system.]
Listening:
 
‘No, I had my last child when I was 30.’
Deduction:
 
The patient’s symptoms are not due to a
weakening of the Kidney Defensive-Qi system during
childbirth as they started 10 years after her last child
was born.
Question:
 
‘And did you have any allergies or asthma
when you were a child?’ [This question is asked to
determine whether the patient has an atopic
constitution and the asthma is of the allergic type or
not.]
Answer:
 
‘No, none at all.’
Deduction:
 
The patient does not have a constitutional
Kidney and Lung deficiency, which can be a cause of
2314
asthma and allergies.
Question:
 
‘Is there a lot of white discharge when you
sneeze?’ [This question is important to differentiate
allergic rhinitis, which is characterized by a white
watery nasal discharge, from sinusitis, which is
characterized by a thick yellow nasal discharge.]
Answer:
 
‘No, there is not much discharge at all.’
Question:
 
‘Do you sneeze all year around or just in
the spring and summer?’
Answer:
 
‘It first started in the spring but it continues
all year round.’
Question:
 
‘Are you allergic to cats and dogs?’
Answer:
 
‘No, I am not.’
Deduction:
 
Considering the absence of a history of
childhood asthma and eczema, the absence of a 
white
watery nasal discharge, the absence of reaction to dogs
and cats’ allergens seem to indicate that this patient’s
rhinitis is not allergic.
Question:
 
‘You said that apart from this you had
another complaint?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, I have dryness and flaking around my
mouth.’
Question:
 
‘Is it all around your mouth or just on the
top or the bottom?’ [This is asked to determine whether
the Directing Vessel is involved, which affects the area
all around the mouth, or whether the Stomach and
Large Intestine are involved, which affect the skin just
above the mouth.]
Answer:
 
‘It is mainly on the top and sides but a little
bit on the bottom.’
Deduction:
 
Even though the dry and flaky skin is
mainly above the mouth, the fact that the areas below
and to the sides of the mouth are also affected indicates
a pathology of the Directing Vessel.
Question:
 
‘Is there redness as well as dryness and
flaking?’ [This is asked to determine whether Heat is
involved in the pathology of the symptom or whether it
is caused by a deficiency of Blood and/or Yin.]
2315
Answer:
 
‘Yes, there is.’
Deduction:
 
The fact that there is redness indicates
that Heat (which may be Full or Empty) is present.
Question:
 
‘How long have you had this problem?’
Answer:
 
‘About 5 or 6 years.’
Question:
 
‘How are your periods?’ [At this point, it is
crucial to ask about her menstrual cycle, i.e. the
regularity of it, the amount of bleeding, the colour of
the menstrual blood, pain and any premenstrual
symptoms. In women these questions are crucial
because the state of the gynaecological system can
cause not only gynaecological problems but also other
general problems. For example, in this case, the
dryness, redness and flaking around the mouth may
reflect a pathology of the Directing Vessel.]
Answer:
 
‘They are regular.’
Question:
 
‘How long do they last?’
Answer:
 
‘About 5 or 6 days.’
Question:
 
‘Are they particularly light or heavy?’
Answer:
 
‘They are heavier than they used to be.’
Question:
 
‘And are they painful?’
Answer:
 
‘No, but they are a little uncomfortable. I
get a bit of backache beforehand.’
Question:
 
‘What colour is the blood?’
Answer:
 
‘It is dark and there are sometimes clots.’
Question:
 
‘Do you get any premenstrual problems?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘And what about contraception? Are you
on the pill or do you use the coil?’ [It is important to ask
about contraception as this can affect the nature of the
menstrual cycle.]
Answer:
 
‘No, I don’t.’
Deduction:
 
Her menstrual cycle is broadly normal.
The periods have been heavier recently but that
happens frequently in the perimenopausal years; the
darkness of the blood and the clots indicates some
Blood stasis but this cannot be very severe as the
periods are not painful. Observation of the tongue later
2316
should confirm whether the Blood stasis is significant
or not.
Question:
 
‘Do you suffer from dizziness?’ [I now
begin to ask questions in order to determine whether
there is any deficiency of the Kidneys involved.]
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you get any ringing in your ears?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you have any problems with
urination?’
Answer:
 
‘I have to go more often than I used to. I
have to go at night most nights.’
Deduction:
 
The answer to the last question implies
that a Kidney deficiency may be involved as the
patient’s urination has become more frequent and she
regularly needs to urinate at night.
Question:
 
‘Do you feel particularly hot or cold?’ [In
women, Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang deficiency
normally coexist but it is important to establish which
is predominant.]
Answer:
 
‘I feel cold at night.’
Question:
 
‘So you never have any night sweating?’
Answer:
 
‘No, never.’
Deduction:
 
This points towards the fact that Kidney-
Yang deficiency is predominant.
Question:
 
‘How is your digestion?’ [It is always
necessary to ask this question to establish the state of
the Stomach and Spleen.]
Answer:
 
‘I don’t have any problems with it.’
Question:
 
‘You do not get any bloating after meals?’
Answer:
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you have a bowel movement every
day?’
Answer:
 
‘Normally, yes.’
Question:
 
‘And is your appetite good?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, I think it is quite normal.’
Deduction:
 
There is no significant Spleen- or
Stomach-Qi deficiency.
2317
Question::
 
‘Do you suffer from headaches?’
Answer:
 
‘No, but I have had sinus problems in the
past. I have very blocked sinuses.’
Question:
 
‘When did that start?’
Answer:
 
‘When I was 30 and I was expecting my
second child.’
Question:
 
‘And do you normally sneeze more in the
mornings?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, I have done since I was a child.’
Deduction:
 
This contradicts slightly what the patient
said earlier, that is, that she did not suffer from any
allergies as a child. We must therefore discard our
earlier deduction that there is no constitutional
deficiency of Defensive-Qi of the Lungs and Kidneys,
and conclude that actually there is. However, to
complicate matters, her chronic complaint of blocked
sinuses seems to point to chronic sinusitis. This is not
unusual as allergic rhinitis and sinusitis can occur
simultaneously.
Observation:
 
The tongue was Pale, partially peeled
and had cracks in the Stomach area.
Deduction:
 
The Pale colour of the tongue indicates
either a Qi, Yang or Blood deficiency, while the fact that
it is partially peeled and with cracks in the Stomach
area points towards an underlying Stomach-Yin
deficiency. Most probably, the tongue indicates a
simultaneous deficiency of Qi and Yin of the Stomach.
Question:
 
‘Do you have any problems with your
eyes?’ [I now ask further questions to confirm or
eliminate the presence of Blood deficiency.]
Answer::
 
‘No.’
Question:
 
‘Do you ever feel a tingling sensation in
your limbs?’
Answer:
 
‘No, I don’t.’
Question:
 
‘Do you sleep well?’
Answer:
 
‘Yes, I do.’
Question:
 
‘Do you ever suffer from palpitations?’
Answer:
 
‘No, never.’
2318
Deduction:
 
There is no apparent Liver- or Heart-
Blood deficiency.
Palpation:
 
The pulse is generally Wiry and the right
Front position is Full.
Deduction:
 
The overall Wiry pulse confirms what the
observation of the patient indicated, that is, that there
is a Full Liver pattern. The Full quality of the right Front
position in this case probably reflects the congestion in
the sinuses and nose, rather than a Lung pattern. It
should be remembered that the pulse positions reflect
areas of the body as well as the channels and organs;
with reference to areas, the Front positions reflect the
condition of the head.
Conclusion:
 
The patient is suffering from a mixed
condition. The Root (
Ben
 
) is a deficiency of the
Defensive Qi of the Kidneys and Lungs (shown on the
tongue which is Pale), as well as Stomach-Yin deficiency
(shown by the partially peeled nature of the tongue and
the cracks in the Stomach area). A geographic tongue
such as this is often linked with an atopic constitution.
The Manifestation (
Biao
 
) is Dampness in the Stomach
channel and this is causing the patient’s symptom of a
blocked nose (shown by the Full quality of the right
Front pulse).
The fact that the patient said that she has sneezed
every morning since she was a child indicates that she
was born with a slight deficiency of the Defensive Qi of
the Lungs and Kidneys. The exacerbation of her
symptoms over the last few years is probably due to the
natural waning of the Kidney energy with age.
The patient also confirmed later that she had had a
very stressful time over the last few years. This was
reflected in the Wiry nature of her pulse and could also
have been a catalyst to the worsening of her symptoms.
The Wiry pulse may also reflect the beginning of a
condition of Liver-Wind, which is manifested also by
the slight shaking of her head. Liver-Wind could have
arisen either from the Kidney deficiency or from a
2319
Blood deficiency, which is shown by the dull-pale
complexion (although she has no other symptoms of it).
 
Group 2
‘In confusing and complicated conditions, treat
Phlegm’
Case history 4
A 35-year-old man had been suffering from a hot
sensation of the palms and soles and ache of fingers
and toes for about 6 months; the fingers and toes were
not swollen nor hot to the touch. He had no other
symptoms apart from annoying phlegm in the throat
which he had to clear a few times a day. The tongue was
quite normal and the pulse was very slightly Slippery.
The hot sensation of palms and soles strongly suggests
Yin deficiency, possibly of the Heart and Kidneys or
Lung and Kidneys. However, there was no other
symptom or sign of Yin deficiency at all and neither the
pulse nor the tongue indicates Yin deficiency at all. The
ache of the hands and feet could be a form of Painful
Obstruction Syndrome (
Bi
 
syndrome) due to Wind,
Cold or Dampness in the joints but the ache did not
react to changes in weather, a symptom that is normally
present in Painful Obstruction Syndrome. Furthermore,
the hot sensation of palms and soles could be due to
Heat Painful Obstruction Syndrome, but this was
clearly not the case as the joints were not swollen or
hot.
Considering that it was difficult to find a proper
explanation for this patient’s symptoms, I concluded
that, according to the principle ‘in complicated and
difficult-to-explain conditions, treat Phlegm’, they were
due to Phlegm and the patient’s need to clear his throat
frequently would support this conclusion.
2320
I therefore set out to resolve Phlegm by using the
following points:
 
• 
 
LU-9 Taiyuan to resolve Phlegm from the
Lung channel and thus affect his fingers and
palms
• 
 
Ren-12 Zhongwan, ST-36 Zusanli, ST-40
Fenglong and SP-9 Yinlingquan to resolve
Phlegm
• 
 
KI-3 Taixi to affect soles and toes.
Use of this combination of points four times at
weekly intervals cleared the problem completely.
‘Pulse determinant in diagnosis’
Case history 5
A 53-year-old woman had been suffering from hair loss
for 6 years after a period of intense stress. At that time,
her periods also stopped abruptly. She had no other
symptoms apart from tiredness. Her tongue was Pale,
slightly Purple on the right side in the breast area, and
Swollen. The pulse was clearly Wiry all over.
This is a good example of the determinant
importance of pulse diagnosis when there are few
symptoms and signs to go by. The pulse should never
be dismissed as a factor in diagnosis but even less so
when there are few symptoms and signs. Falling hair
may be due either to a Deficiency (usually of Liver-
Blood or Kidney-Essence) or to an Excess, usually Liver-
Wind. When falling hair is due to internal Wind, the
hair loss occurs suddenly. The Wiry pulse definitely
indicated that the hair loss was not due to a Deficiency
but to Liver-Wind; this is also confirmed by the abrupt
onset after a period of stress.
‘Never ignore the tongue’
2321
Case history 6
A 33-year-old woman had been suffering from otitis
media for 18 months: she had a thick, yellow discharge
from the ear. She had resorted to antibiotics five times
but the middle-ear infection always returned. She had
also suffered from asthma for 2 years and allergic
rhinitis since she was 21. Her tongue was Red, Peeled in
the centre and front, and had a bilateral thin white
coating. Her pulse was Weak on the right and slightly
Wiry on the left.
The middle-ear infection is clearly due to Damp-Heat
in the Gall-Bladder channel: that it is Damp-Heat is
clear from the thick, yellow discharge; that it is in the
Gall-Bladder channel is clear from the bilateral coating
(a sign of Gall-Bladder problems) and the Wiry pulse.
However, it would be a mistake to treat her only for
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder channel and would be
not much better than using antibiotics. In fact, the
tongue shows other important patterns that cannot be
ignored. The lack of coating in the centre and front
indicates Stomach- and Lung-Yin deficiency while the
redness of the tongue body (combined with the absence
of coating) indicates Empty-Heat in these organs.
Although there are no symptoms and signs of Yin
deficiency with Empty-Heat of the Stomach and Lungs,
the tongue appearance is enough to diagnose this
condition. Thus, treatment should be aimed not only at
resolving Damp-Heat from the Gall-Bladder channel,
but also at nourishing Stomach- and Lung-Yin:
nourishing these two organs will tonify the Upright Qi
and strengthen the immune system, which should help
her to fight off the ear infections.
Indeed, it could be said that the deficiency of the
Stomach and Lungs is the reason that the antibiotics
did not clear her condition and that it returned each
time. Had the tongue shown only the retention of
Damp-Heat in the Gall-Bladder with a sticky coating, it
could be argued that the ear infection would not have
2322
recurred after the course of antibiotics. Thus, this case
history is a good example of two principles, that is, that
the tongue should never be ignored, and that the
tongue may also assist in predicting the possible effect
of Western medication. In this case, the deficiency of
Stomach- and Lung-Yin indicated by the absence of
coating clearly alerts us to a deficiency of the Upright
Qi (and the immune system from a Western
perspective) and therefore the possibility that the
antibiotic treatment might not work.
I therefore treated this patient by simultaneously
resolving Damp-Heat from the Gall-Bladder channel
and nourishing Stomach- and Lung-Yin with a variation
of the formula Xiao Chai Hu Tang 
Small Bupleurum
Decoction
 
:
 
Chai Hu 
Radix Bupleuri
 
6 g
Huang Qin 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Ban Xia 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Dang Shen 
Radix Codonopsis pilosulae
 
6 g
Yin Chen Hao 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
4 g
Mai Men Dong 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Tai Zi Shen 
Radix Pseudostellariae
 
6 g
Shan Yao 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
With acupuncture, I treated the following points:
 
• 
 
Ren-12 Zhongwan and SP-9 Yinlingquan to
resolve Dampness in general
• 
 
ST-36 Zusanli and SP-6 Sanyinjiao to
nourish Stomach- and Lung-Yin
• 
 
TB-5 Waiguan and GB-41 Zulinqi to resolve
Damp-Heat from the Gall-Bladder channel.
2323
‘In men, the clinical manifestations sometimes
mimic Yin deficiency but are not due to Yin
deficiency’
Case history 7
A 31-year-old man had been suffering from tiredness,
insomnia, expectoration of phlegm, nausea, backache,
tinnitus and night sweating. His tongue was slightly
Red and Swollen and had teethmarks and his pulse was
Weak especially on the left Front position.
The tiredness, backache, tinnitus and night sweating
could be easily interpreted as being due to Kidney-Yin
deficiency. However, closer examination and
questioning revealed that each symptom could be
explained differently. The backache was due to excessive
lifting, the tinnitus was due to working in a band and
listening to very loud music, and the 
night sweating
was due to Phlegm-Heat. The symptoms of Phlegm-
Heat are the expectoration of phlegm, the nausea, the
insomnia, the night sweating and the Red-Swollen
tongue. Thus, although the manifestations could have
easily led us to diagnose Kidney-Yin deficiency, the real
problem is Phlegm-Heat. The tongue was important to
confirm this diagnosis.
‘When the pulse contradicts the other clinical
manifestations’
Case history 8
A 37-year-old woman had been suffering from a
shortening of her menstrual cycle for the previous 2
years; the period was also becoming scantier in amount.
Other symptoms included a gradual loss of hair, the
occasional expectoration of phlegm, poor memory, poor
concentration, floaters, palpitations, a feeling of cold,
backache, tinnitus and night sweating. She had also
been diagnosed as having the beginning of
osteoporosis and a gynaecological examination revealed
that she suffered from the early stages of polycystic
2324
ovary syndrome. Her tongue was Pale with a white
sticky coating and her pulse was Slippery and Rapid (88
b.p.m.).
Most of her symptoms clearly show a deficiency of
Blood (loss of hair, poor memory and concentration,
floaters and palpitations) and of Kidney-Yang (feeling
cold, backache, tinnitus, night sweating and
osteoporosis). Although night sweating is a symptom
of Yin deficiency, in women it often also accompanies
Kidney-Yang deficiency. There are also a few
manifestations of Phlegm, these being the
expectoration of phlegm, the Slippery pulse, the sticky
tongue coating and the polycystic ovary syndrome
(usually due to Dampness and Phlegm against a
background of Kidney deficiency). However, there is
one symptom that does not fit all the manifestations
and that is the Rapid pulse: this could conceivably be
due to Phlegm-Heat but there are no signs of Heat.
A Rapid pulse in the absence of Heat symptoms is
often due to shock and emotional upset. Asking the
patient about this, she confirmed that this was the case.
Case history 9
A 41-year-old man complained of tiredness, sleepiness
and lack of motivation. He had been feeling like that for
about 1 year. He also complained of a feeling of cold ‘of
the skin’ for about 2 years. His tongue was Red,
completely Peeled, with a very deep Heart crack and
Spleen cracks; his pulse was Slow (60), Empty at the
deep level on the left side, especially so in the Heart
position. His eyes were rather dull.
These were the presenting symptoms. On the face of
it, there is a striking contradiction between the tongue,
which indicates Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency, and
the pulse, which indicates Cold (being Slow). The cold
feeling of the skin and feet also indicates Cold and
possibly Yang deficiency. When a slow pulse contradicts
the other manifestations and especially the tongue, the
first thing to check is whether it is due to exercise. In
2325
this case it was, as this patient had been doing a lot of
vigorous exercise and many sports over many years
when he was younger; thus, this could account for the
slow pulse. On enquiring about other manifestations, it
turned out that he felt often thirsty and drank a lot of
water, his mouth was often dry, his sleep was very
restless and he had a burning sensation of his feet
occasionally – all symptoms which confirm the Empty-
Heat. The dull 
shen
 
of his eyes, together with the very
deep Heart crack on the tongue, indicates deep
emotional problems and stress, which he admitted to
when asked. What to make of the cold sensation ‘of the
skin’? I interpreted this as being due to his mental
depression and emotional stress; it is therefore neither
Full- nor Empty-Cold but false Cold.
Thus, the appearance of the tongue and the
symptoms of Empty-Heat (restless sleep, dry mouth
and burning sensation of feet) definitely warrant a
diagnosis of Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency in spite of
the cold feeling of the skin and Slow pulse;
furthermore, the emptiness of the pulse at deep level
confirms Yin deficiency.
‘Tiredness with acute onset is often due to
Latent Heat’
Case history 10
A 26-year-old woman complained of sudden tiredness, a
feeling of heaviness of the limbs, a feeling of muzziness
of the head, loss of appetite, loose stools, a feeling of
cold, headache, lack of concentration and insomnia. Her
tongue was Pale and Swollen with a yellow coating and
her pulse was Full and Rapid.
This is a good example of Latent Heat emerging and
causing sudden tiredness and weariness. Latent Heat
occurs when an external pathogenic factor invades the
body without causing immediate symptoms but
incubates inside and turns into interior Heat. After
some weeks or months, the Latent Heat emerges from
2326
the Interior to cause symptoms similar to the above.
Usually the symptoms of Latent Heat are tiredness with
sudden onset, weariness, a feeling of heaviness of the
legs, thirst, insomnia, irritability, Red tongue and Rapid
pulse.
This patient had only some of these symptoms (there
was no thirst nor irritability), while she had other
symptoms not fitting the diagnosis of Latent Heat (i.e.
loose stools, feeling cold, Pale tongue). The reason for
this is that Latent Heat does not occur in isolation but
against a pre-existing background, which in this case
was Yang deficiency – hence the cold feeling and the
Pale tongue. The clinching signs in this case were the
yellow coating on the tongue but, most of all, the Full
and Rapid pulse, which is of course normally in
complete contradiction with a feeling of tiredness. In a
nutshell, the essential clinching symptoms, in this case,
were the sudden onset of the tiredness coupled with
the Full and Rapid pulse.
The prescription used was a variation of Zhi Zi Chi
Tang 
Gardenia-Soja Decoction
 
as follows:
 
Shan Zhi Zi 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
6 g
Dan Dou Chi 
Semen Sojae praeparatum
 
6 g
Ban Xia 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Shi Gao 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
6 g
Zhu Ye 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
4 g
Huang Qin 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Gan Cao 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
A course of 5 days of this decoction daily cleared up
the problem entirely and the patient regained her
energy.
‘The tongue and pulse are determinant in
deciding whether to expel pathogenic factors or
tonify the body’s Qi in mixed Deficiency–Excess
2327
conditions’
Case history 11
A 49-year-old man complained of tiredness, insomnia,
difficulty in concentrating, pain on urination, backache,
recurrent sinusitis, deterioration in hearing and sight,
poor memory, night sweating, and abdominal
distension. His tongue was Reddish-Purple with a very
sticky coating, teethmarks and a deep Heart crack; his
pulse was Slippery in general and Weak on the left Rear
position.
There are many symptoms of Kidney deficiency, such
as tiredness, poor memory, backache, deterioration in
hearing and sight, night sweating and Weak pulse on
the left Kidney position. There are also a few symptoms
of Spleen deficiency, such as tiredness, abdominal
distension and teethmarks on the edges of the tongue.
However, the pulse and tongue clearly reflect a Full
rather than Empty condition; in fact, the reddish-purple
colour indicates Blood stasis and the very sticky coating
indicates Phlegm. Presumably, the Phlegm-Heat is
causing the pain on urination and insomnia. Thus,
there is a marked contrast between two Deficiency
conditions (deficiency of the Spleen and Kidneys) and
two Excess conditions (Blood stasis and Phlegm-Heat).
In such contradictory conditions, what should the
treatment principle be? Should we concentrate on
eliminating pathogenic factors or on tonifying the
body’s Qi? I usually prefer to eliminate pathogenic
factors first, 
especially
 
when the tongue and pulse
clearly point to a Full condition as they do in this case. I
therefore set out to move Qi, invigorate Blood, resolve
Phlegm and clear Heat with a combination of Yue Ju
Wan 
Gardenia-Ligusticum Pill
 
and Wen Dan Tang
Warming the Gall-Bladder Decoction
 
.
Had his pulse been Weak in general and his tongue
perhaps Peeled and with teethmarks (indicating a
deficiency of Kidney-Yin and of Spleen-Qi), I would
2328
have probably concentrated my attention on tonifying
the body’s Qi.
‘Liver patterns often occur simultaneously’
The following case history is a good example of the
frequent coexistence of several Liver patterns
simultaneously.
Case history 12
A 29-year-old woman had a benign lump in her left
breast which grew quickly over 5 years. The lump was
painful when she was angry and also before her period
when she suffered from premenstrual tension. Her
periods were painful and irregular, coming up to 4 days
early or late; the period was rather scanty and the
colour of the blood was dark red with dark clots. She
also suffered from headaches on the sides of the head
(along the Gall-Bladder channel). She occasionally
suffered from blurred vision and dizziness. Her tongue
was Pale and very slightly Purple; her pulse was Wiry.
There are four Liver patterns:
 
• 
 
Liver-Qi stagnation (breast lump, irregular
periods, premenstrual tension)
• 
 
Liver-Blood stasis (painful breast lump,
irregular and painful periods with dark clots)
• 
 
Liver-Blood deficiency (Pale tongue,
blurred vision, dizziness, scanty periods)
• 
 
Liver-Yang rising (headaches, Wiry pulse).
These four Liver patterns are all interlinked. Liver-
Blood deficiency leads to Liver-Qi stagnation and this,
in turn, leads on the one hand to Liver-Blood stasis and
on the other to Liver-Yang rising.
2329
APPENDIX 2
PRESCRIPTIONS
NOTE
Please note that some of the herbs contained in the following
prescriptions are banned for use in some countries. This may be
either because they are toxic (in some cases wrongly perceived to
be so) or because they are processed from endangered plants or
endangered animal species; in some countries, no animal
substances may be used at all. As the laws governing the use of
these herbs (or animal substances) vary from country to country, it
is the responsibility of readers to acquaint themself with the laws
of their country. The inclusion of such herbs in the prescriptions
below does not imply an endorsement of their use. However, I
have kept the prescriptions as they are in the original source texts
because this allows us to make rational substitutions for the herbs
(or animal substances) which cannot be used in the West. For
example, the prescription Xi Jiao Di Huang Tang 
Cornus Rhinoceri-
Rehmannia Decoction
 
contains Xi Jiao 
Cornu Rhinoceri
 
, rhinoceros
horn, which is obviously illegal; as this substance has Blood-
cooling properties, we can make a rational substitution with
another herb that cools Blood.
 
AI FU NUAN GONG WAN 
Artemisia-Cyperus Warming the Uterus Pill
Ai Ye
 
Folium Artemisiae argyi
 
9 g
Wu Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Evodiae rutaecarpae
 
4.5 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
4.5 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
2330
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Xu Duan
 
Radix Dipsaci asperi
 
6 g
 
AN SHEN DING ZHI WAN 
Calming the Spirit and Settling the Will-Power Pill
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos paradicis
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Yuan Zhi
 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
9 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
4.5 g
Long Chi
 
Dens Draconis
 
4.5 g
 
BA XIAN CHANG SHOU WAN 
Eight Immortals Longevity Pill
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
 
BA ZHEN TANG 
Eight Precious Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
10 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
5 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
8 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
2331
15 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
10 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
8 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
5
g
 
BA ZHENG SAN 
Eight Rectifications Powder
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
Hua Shi
 
Talcum
 
12 g
Che Qian Zi
 
Semen Plantaginis
 
9 g
Qu Mai
 
Herba Dianthi
 
6 g
Bian Xu
 
Herba Polygoni avicularis
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
3 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
Deng Xin Cao
 
Medulla Junci effusi
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
BAI HE GU JIN TANG 
Lilium Consolidating Metal Decoction
Bai He
 
Bulbus Lilii
 
15 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
6 g
Chuan Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae cirrhosae
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
2332
 
BAI HU TANG 
White Tiger Decoction
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
30 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Geng Mi
 
Non-glutinous rice 9 g
 
BAI TOU WENG TANG 
Pulsatilla Decoction
Bai Tou Weng
 
Radix Pulsatillae chinensis
 
6 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
9 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
9 g
Qin Pi
 
Cortex Fraxini
 
9 g
 
BAN XIA HOU PO TANG 
Pinellia-Magnolia Decoction
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
12 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
9 g
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae frutescentis
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
12 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
 
BAN XIA TANG 
Pinelliae Decoction
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
12 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
Wu Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Evodiae rutaecarpae
 
3 g
Qiang Hu
 
Radix Peucedani
 
6 g
2333
Bie Jia
 
Carapacis Amydae sinensis
 
9 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
6 seeds
 
BAO HE WAN 
Preserving and Harmonizing Pill
Shan Zha
 
Fructus Crataegi
 
9 g
Shen Qu
 
Massa Fermentata medicinalis
 
9 g
Lai Fu Zi
 
Semen Raphani sativi
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
3 g
 
BAO YIN JIAN 
Protecting Yin Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
24 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
15 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
9 g
Xu Duan
 
Radix Dipsaci asperi
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
BAO YUAN TANG 
Preserving the Source Decoction
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
2334
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
 
BEI MU GUA LOU SAN 
Fritillaria-Trichosanthes Powder
Zhe Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae thunbergii
 
4.5 g
Gua Lou
 
Fructus Trichosanthis
 
3 g
Tian Hua Fen
 
Radix Trichosanthis kirilowii
 
2.4 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
2.4 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
2.4 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
2.4 g
 
BU FEI TANG 
Tonifying the Lungs Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
24 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Zi Wan
 
Radix Asteris tatarici
 
9 g
Sang Bai Pi
 
Cortex Mori albae radicis
 
12 g
 
BU GAN TANG 
Tonifying the Liver Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
15 g
Suan Zao Ren
 
Semen Ziziphi spinosae
 
6 g
2335
Mu Gua
 
Fructus Chaenomelis lagenariae
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
BU SHEN GU CHONG WAN 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Consolidating the
Penetrating Vessel Pill
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
Xu Duan
 
Radix Dipsaci asperi
 
6 g
Ba Ji Tian
 
Radix Morindae officinalis
 
6 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
6 g
Lu Jiao Shuang
 
Cornu Cervi degelatinatum
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
9 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
6 g
Dang Shen
 
Radix Codonopsis pilosulae
 
6 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
3 dates
Sha Ren
 
Fructus seu Semen Amomi
 
3 g
 
BU SHEN YANG XUE TANG 
Tonifying the Kidneys and Nourishing Blood Decoction
Yin Yang Huo
 
Herba Epimedi
 
6 g
Xian Mao
 
Rhizoma Curculiginis orchioidis
 
6 g
Zi He Che
 
Placenta Hominis
 
6 g
Nu Zhen Zi
 
Fructus Ligustri lucidi
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Dang Shen
 
Radix Codonopsis pilosulae
 
6 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii
 
6 g
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
2336
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
3 g
 
BU ZHONG YI QI TANG 
Tonifying the Centre and Benefiting Qi Decoction
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
12 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Sheng Ma
 
Rhizoma Cimicifugae
 
3 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
3 g
 
CANG ER BI DOU YAN FANG 
Xanthium Sinusitis Formula
Cang Er Zi
 
Fructus Xanthii sibirici
 
9 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Pu Gong Ying
 
Herba Taraxaci mongolici cum radice
 
6 g
Ge Gen
 
Radix Puerariae
 
9 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
6 g
Bai Zhi
 
Radix Angelicae dahuricae
 
3 g
Che Qian Zi
 
Semen Plantaginis
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
CANG FU DAO TAN WAN 
Atractylodes-Cyperus Conducting Phlegm Pill
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis lanceae
 
9 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
9 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Dan Nan Xing
 
Pulvis Arisaemae cum felle bovis
 
4.5 g
2337
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
Shen Qu
 
Massa Fermentata medicinalis
 
6 g
 
CHAI HU SHU GAN TANG 
Bupleurum Pacifying the Liver Decoction
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
4.5 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
4.5 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
1.5 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
4.5 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
4.5 g
 
CHANG TAI BAI ZHU SAN 
Long [Life] Fetus Atractylodes Powder
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
3 g
Chuan Jiao
 
Pericarpium Zanthoxyli bungeani
 
3 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii Asini
 
6 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
 
CHEN XIANG JIANG QI TANG
(Stomach-Qi stagnation) 
Aquilaria Descending Qi Decoction
Chen Xiang
 
Lignum Aquilariae
 
9 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
2338
Sha Ren
 
Fructus seu Semen Amomi
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
DA BU YIN WAN 
Great Tonifying Yin Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
120 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
120 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
180 g
Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
180 g
Pig’s bone-marrow
 
12 g
 
DA BU YUAN JIAN 
Great Tonifying the Original [Qi] Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
3 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
DA DING FENG ZHU 
Big Stopping Wind Pearl
Ji Zi Huang
 
Egg yolk 2 yolks
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
18 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
12
2339
g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
18 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
18 g
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
6 g
Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
12 g
Bie Jia
 
Carapax Amydae sinensis
 
12 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
12 g
 
DAN SHEN YIN 
Salvia Decoction
Dan Shen
 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
30 g
Tan Xiang
 
Lignum Santali albi
 
4.5 g
Sha Ren
 
Fructus seu Semen et Pericarpium amomi
 
4.5 g
 
DAN ZHI XIAO YAO SAN 
Moutan-Gardenia Free and Easy Wanderer Powder
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
3 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
3 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
3 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
34 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
1.5 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
1.5 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
1.5 g
 
DANG GUI SHAO YAO SAN 
Angelica and Peony powder
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
2340
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
15 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
12 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
12 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
6 g
 
DANG GUI SI NI TANG 
Angelica Four Rebellious Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba cum Radice Asari
 
3 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Zizyphi jujubae
 
6 dates
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
 
DANG GUI JI XUE TENG TANG 
Angelica-Ji Xue Teng Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
15 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
15 g
Long Yan Rou
 
Arillus Euphoriae longanae
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Dan Shen
 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
9 g
Ji Xue Teng
 
Radix et Caulis Jixueteng
 
15 g
 
DANG GUI LONG HUI WAN 
Angelica Dragon Aloe Pill
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Long Dan Cao
 
Radix Gentianae scabrae
 
6 g
2341
Lu Hui
 
Herba Aloes
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
4.5 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
3 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
3 g
 
DANG GUI gui ZHI TANG 
Angelica-Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
3 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
0.6 g
Pao Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
(fried) 2
slices
Da Zao
 
Fructus Zizyphi jujubae
 
3 dates
 
DAO CHI QING XIN TANG 
Conducting Redness and Clearing the Heart Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Lian Zi Xin
 
Plumula Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
6 g
Hua Shi
 
Talcum
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Hu Po
 
Succinum
 
3 g
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
6 g
2342
 
DAO CHI SAN 
Conducting Redness Powder
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
15 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
DI SHENG TANG 
Supporting the Sage Decoction
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubra
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Ze Lan
 
Herba Lycopi lucidi
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
DI TAN TANG 
Scouring Phlegm Decoction
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6.6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
6 g
Zhu Ru
 
Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis
 
2.1 g
Dan Nan Xing
 
Pulvis Arisaemae cum felle bovis
 
6.6 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
3 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1.5 g
 
DING XIANG SHI DI TANG 
2343
Caryophyllum-Diospyros Decoction
Ding Xiang
 
Flos Caryophylli
 
6 g
Shi Di
 
Calyx Diospyri Kaki
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
6 g
 
DUO MING SAN 
Seizing Life Powder
Mo Yao
 
Myrrha
 
6 g
Xue Jie
 
Sangui Draconis
 
6 g
 
E JIAO JI ZI HUANG TANG 
Gelatinum Corii Asini-Egg Yolk Decoction
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii Asini
 
6 g
Ji Zi Huang
 
Egg yolk 2 yolks
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
12 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
1.5 g
Gou Teng
 
Ramulus Uncariae
 
6 g
Shi Jue Ming
 
Concha Haliotidis
 
15 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
12 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
12 g
Luo Shi Teng
 
Caulis Trachelospermi jasminoides
 
9 g
 
EMPIRICAL PRESCRIPTION BY DR
CHEN JIA XU FOR LIVER-QI
DEFICIENCY
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
6 g
Dang Shen
 
Radix Codonopsis pilosulae
 
6 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
2344
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
3 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
4 g
Fu Ling
 
Scleortium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
3 g
Bai Zi Ren
 
Semen Biotae orientalis
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
ER CHEN TANG 
Two Old Decoction
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
15 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
15 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
ER ZHI WAN 
Two ultimate Pill
Nu Zhen Zi
 
Fructus Ligustri lucidi
 
9 g
Han Lian Cao
 
Herba Ecliptae prostratae
 
9 g
 
FO SHOU SAN 
Buddha’s Hand Powder
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici Chuanxiong
 
4 g
 
2345
FU TU DAN 
Poria-Cuscuta Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
150 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
210 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
60 g
Lian Zi
 
Semen Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
60 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
90 g
 
FU ZI LI ZHONG WAN 
Aconitum Regulating the Centre Pill
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
GAN CAO GAN JIANG TANG 
Glycyrrhiza-Zingiber Decoction
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
12 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
6 g
 
GAN LU XIAO DU DAN 
Sweet Dew Eliminating Toxin Pill
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
She Gan
 
Rhizoma Belamcandae chinensis
 
4.5 g
Chuan Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae cirrhosae
 
3 g
Hua Shi
 
Talcum
 
9 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
2346
Yin Chen Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
6 g
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
4.5 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
3 g
Bai Dou Kou
 
Fructus Amomi kravanh
 
4.5 g
 
GE GEN QIN LIAN TANG 
Pueraria-Scutellaria-Coptis Decoction
Ge Gen
 
Radix Puerariae
 
9 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
4.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
GE XIA ZHU YU TANG 
Eliminating Stasis below the Diaphragm Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
3 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
6 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
9 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
9 g
Wu Ling Zhi
 
Excrementum Trogopteri
 
9 g
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
 
3 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
3 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
5 g
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
9 g
 
GU TAI JIAN 
Consolidating the Fetus Decoction
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
2347
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
6 g
Sha Ren
 
Fructus Amomi
 
3 g
 
GUI PI TANG 
Tonifying the Spleen Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g (or 
Dang Shen
 
Radix
Codonopsis pilosulae
 
12 g)
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
15 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
12 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
9 g
Suan Zao Ren
 
Semen Ziziphi spinosae
 
9 g
Long Yan Rou
 
Arillus Euphoriae longanae
 
12 g
Yuan Zhi
 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
9 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
3 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
4
g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
Hong Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
5 dates
 
GUI SHEN WAN 
Restoring the Kidneys Pill
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
4 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
6 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
4 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
2348
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
 
GUI ZHI FU LING WAN 
Ramulus Cinnamomi-Poria Pill
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
9 g
 
GUI ZHI TANG 
Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
12 dates
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
 
GUN TAN WAN 
Vapourizing Phlegm Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
Duan Meng Shi
 
Lapis Micae seu Chloriti
 
(calcined) 30 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
240 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
240 g
Chen Xiang
 
Lignum Aquilariae
 
15 g
 
HAO QIN QING DAN TANG 
2349
Artemisia-Scutellaria Clearing the Gall-Bladder
Decoction
Qing Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae apiaceae
 
4.5 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
4.5 g
Zhu Ru
 
Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis
 
9 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
4.5 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
4.5 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
4.5 g
Chi Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos rubrae
 
9 g
Bi Yu San
 
Jasper powder:
Hua Shi
 
Talcum
 
6 parts
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1 part
Qing Dai
 
Indigo pulverata levis
 
1 part
 
HEI SHEN SAN 
Black [Bean] Spirit Powder
Hei Da Dou
 
Semen Glycines
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamoni cassiae
 
3 g
Bao Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
(fried) 3
slices
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
6 g
 
HUA CHONG WAN 
Dissolving Worms Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
He Shi
 
Fructus Carpesii seu Daucusi
 
1500 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
1500 g
Ku Lian Gen Pi
 
Cortex Meliae radicis
 
1500 g
Qian Dan
 
Minium
 
1500 g
2350
Ming Fan
 
Alumen
 
375 g
 
HUA GAN JIAN 
Transforming the Liver Decoction
Qing Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viride
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
4.5 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
4.5 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
4.5 g
Chuan Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae cirrhosae
 
6 g
 
HUANG LIAN E JIAO TANG 
Coptis-Colla Asini Decoction
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
12 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Ji Zi Huang
 
egg yolk 2 yolks
 
HUANG QI JIAN ZHONG TANG 
Astragalus Strengthening the Centre Decoction
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
9 g
Yi Tang
 
Saccharum granorum
 
18 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
18 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
12 dates
2351
 
HUO PO XIA LING TANG 
Agastache-Magnolia-Pinellia-Poria Decoction
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
3 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
4.5 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
9 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
12 g
Bai Dou Kou
 
Fructus Amomi kravanh
 
1.8 g
Zhu Ling
 
Sclerotium Polypori umbellati
 
4.5 g
Dan Dou Chi
 
Semen Sojae praeparatum
 
9 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
4.5 g
 
HUO XIANG ZHENG QI SAN 
Agastache Upright Qi Powder
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
12 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
9 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae frutescentis
 
6 g
Bai Zhi
 
Radix Angelicae dahuricae
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Da Fu Pi
 
Pericarpium Arecae catechu
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
12 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
JIAN LING TANG 
Constructing Roof Tiles Decoction
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
30 g
Huai Niu Xi
 
Radix Achyranthis bidentatae
 
30 g
Dai Zhe Shi
 
Haematitum
 
24 g
2352
Long Gu
 
Os Draconis
 
18 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
18 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
18 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
Bai Zi Ren
 
Semen Biotae orientalis
 
12 g
 
JIE DU HUO XUE TANG 
Expelling Poison Invigorating Blood Decoction
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
6 g
Ge Gen
 
Radix Puerariae
 
6 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
4.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
4.5 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
3 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
4.5 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
 
JIN GUI SHEN QI WAN 
Golden Chest Kidney-Qi Pill
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
2353
 
JIN LING ZI SAN 
Melia Toosendan Powder
Jin Ling Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
30 g
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
 
30 g
 
JIN SUO GU JING WAN 
Metal Lock Consolidating the Essence Pill
Sha Yuan Ji Li
 
Semen Astragali complanati
 
6 g
Qian Shi
 
Semen Euryales ferocis
 
6 g
Lian Xu
 
Stamen Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
6 g
Long Gu
 
Os Draconis
 
3 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
3 g
Lian Zi
 
Semen Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
12 g
 
JING FANG SI WU TANG 
Schizonepeta-Ledebouriella Four Substances Decoction
Jing Jie
 
Herba seu Flos Schizonepetae tenuifoliae
 
4.5 g
Fang Feng
 
Radix Ledebouriellae divaricatae
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
4.5 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae frutescentis
 
3 g
 
JU HE WAN 
Citrus Seed Pill
Ju He
 
Semen Citri Reticulatae
 
6 g
Chuan Lian Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
6 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
3 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
6 g
2354
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis Yanhusuo
 
3 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
3 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
3 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
3 g
Hai Zao
 
Herba Sargassii
 
6 g
Kun Bu
 
Thallus Algae
 
6 g
Hai Dai
 
Zostera marina
 
6 g
 
JU PI ZHU RU TANG 
Citrus-Bambusa Decoction
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
Zhu Ru
 
Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
18 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
5 dates
 
LI YAN CHA 
Benefiting the Throat Tea
Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae
 
6 g
Ju Hua
 
Flos Chrysanthemi morifolii
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
4.5 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
6 g
Mu Hu Die
 
Semen Oroxyli indici
 
4 g
Pang Da Hai
 
Semen Sterculiae scaphigerae
 
4.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
LI YIN JIAN 
Regulating Yin Decoction
2355
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Bao Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
(fried) 3
slices
 
LI ZHONG AN HUI TANG 
Regulating the Centre and Calming Roundworms
Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
2.1 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
3 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
3 g
Chuan Jiao
 
Pericarpium Zanthoxyli bungeani
 
0.9 g
Wu Mei
 
Fructus Pruni mume
 
0.9 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
1.5 g
 
LI ZHONG TANG 
Regulating the Centre Decoction
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
LIAN MEI AN HUI TANG 
Picrorhiza-Prunus Mume Calming Roundworms
Decoction
Hu Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Picrorhizae
 
3 g
Chuan Jiao
 
Pericarpium Zanthoxyli bungeani
 
1.5 g
2356
Lei Wan
 
Sclerotium Omphaliae lapidescens
 
9 g
Wu Mei
 
Fructus Pruni mume
 
2 prunes
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
2.4 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
2 nuts
 
LIAN PO YIN 
Coptis-Magnolia Decoction
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
3 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
9 g
Dan Dou Chi
 
Semen Sojae praeparatum
 
9 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
3 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
3 g
Lu Gen
 
Rhizoma Phragmitis communis
 
15 g
 
LIANG DI TANG 
Two ‘Di’ Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
18 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii chinensis radicis
 
9 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
12 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
9 g
 
LIANG FU WAN 
Alpinia-Cyperus Pill
Gao Liang Jiang
 
Rhizoma Alpiniae officinari
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
2357
 
LIANG GE SAN 
Cooling the Diaphragm Powder
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
600 g
Mang Xiao
 
Mirabilitum
 
600 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
600 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae
 
300 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
300 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
1200 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
300 g
 
LIANG SHOU TANG 
Two Receiving Decoction
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
4.5 g
Qian Shi
 
Semen Euryales ferocis
 
6 g
Bian Dou
 
Semen Dolichoris lablab
 
6 g
Ba Ji Tian
 
Radix Morindae officinalis
 
6 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
6 g
Bai Guo
 
Semen Ginkgo bilobae
 
6 g
 
LING GAN WU WEI JIANG XIN TANG 
Poria-Glycyrrhiza-Schisandra-Zingiber-Asarum
Decoction
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
12 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
9 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
9 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba Asari cum radice
 
9 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
2358
 
LING GUI ZHU GAN TANG 
Poria-Ramulus Cinnamomi-Atractylodes-Glycyrrhiza
Decoction
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
12 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
LING JIAO GOU TENG TANG 
Cornu Antelopis-Uncaria Decoction
Ling Yang Jiao
 
Cornu Antelopis
 
4.5 g
Gou Teng
 
Ramulus Uncariae
 
9 g
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
6 g
Ju Hua
 
Flos Chrysanthemi morifolii
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
15 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
9 g
Chuan Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae cirrhosae
 
12 g
Zhu Ru
 
Caulis Bambusae in Taenis
 
15 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
2.5 g
 
LIU JUN ZI TANG 
Six Gentlemen Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
4.5 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
3 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
2359
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
4.5 g
 
LIU WEI DI HUANG WAN 
Six-Ingredient Rehmannia Pill
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
 
LONG CHI QING HUN TANG 
Dens Draconis Clearing the Ethereal Soul Decoction
Long Chi
 
Dens Draconis
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
4.5 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Yuan Zhi
 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
4.5 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Gui Xin
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
6 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba cum Radice Asari
 
1.5 g
 
LONG DAN BI YUAN FANG 
Gentiana ‘Nose Pool’ Formula
Long Dan Cao
 
Radix Gentianae scabrae
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Xia Ku Cao
 
Spica Prunellae vulgaris
 
6 g
Yu Xing Cao
 
Herba cum Radice Houttuyniae cordatae
 
6 g
Ju Hua
 
Flos Chrysanthemi morifolii
 
6 g
Bai Zhi
 
Radix Angelicae dahuricae
 
6 g
2360
Cang Er Zi
 
Fructus Xanthii sibirici
 
6 g
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
4.5 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
12 g
Che Qian Zi
 
Semen Plantaginis
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
 
LONG DAN XIE GAN TANG 
Gentiana Draining the Liver Decoction
Long Dan Cao
 
Radix Gentianae scabrae
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
9 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
9 g
Che Qian Zi
 
Semen Plantaginis
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
12 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
9 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
LU JIAO TU SI ZI WAN 
Cornus Cervi-Cuscuta Pill
Lu Jiao Shuang
 
Cornu Cervi degelatinatum
 
9 g
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
9 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
12 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
6 g
Lian Xu
 
Semen Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
6 g
Bai Guo
 
Semen Ginkgo bilobae
 
6 g
Qian Shi
 
Semen Euryales ferocis
 
6 g
 
MA HUANG TANG 
2361
Ephedra Decoction
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
9 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
MA XING SHI GAN TANG 
Ephedra-Prunus-Gypsum-Glycyrrhiza Decoction
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
12 g
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
48 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
18 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
 
MA ZI REN WAN 
Cannabis Pill
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
9 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
4.5 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
4.5 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
4.5 g
 
MAI MEN DONG TANG 
Ophiopogon Decoction
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
60 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
4
g
2362
Geng Mi
 
Semen Oryzae sativae
 
6 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
3 dates
 
MU XIANG LIU QI YIN 
Aucklandia Flowing Qi Decoction
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
4.5 g
Qing Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viride
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae frutescentis
 
3 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Mu Gua
 
Fructus Chaenomelis lagenariae
 
3 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
4.5 g
Bai Zhi
 
Radix Angelicae dahuricae
 
3 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Cao Guo
 
Fructus Amomi tsaoko
 
3 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
E Zhu
 
Rhizoma Curcumae zedoariae
 
3 g
Da Fu Pi
 
Pericarpium Arecae catechu
 
3 g
Ding Xiang
 
Flos Caryophylli
 
3 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
3 g
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
3 g
Mu Tong
 
Caulis Mutong
 
1.5 g
 
NEI BU WAN 
Inner Tonification Pill
Lu Rong
 
Cornu Cervi parvum
 
3 g
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
2363
Rou Cong Rong
 
Herba Cistanchis deserticolae
 
6 g
Sha Yuan Zi
 
Semen Astragali complanati
 
6 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
6 g
Sang Piao Xiao
 
Ootheca Mantidis
 
6 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
2 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
2 g
Bai Ji Li
 
Fructus Tribuli terrestris
 
3 g
Zi Wan
 
Radix Asteris tatarici
 
3 g
 
NUAN GAN JIAN 
Warming the Liver Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
9 g
Xiao Hui Xiang
 
Fructus Foeniculi vulgaris
 
6 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
6 g
Chen Xiang
 
Lignum Aquilariae
 
3 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
 
PING WEI SAN 
Balancing the Stomach Powder
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis lanceae
 
12 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
9 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
QI JU DI HUANG WAN 
Lycium-Chrysanthemum-Rehmannia Pill
2364
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
6 g
Ju Hua
 
Flos Chrysanthemi morifolii
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
 
QING E WAN 
Young Maiden Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
(Jiang Zhi Chao) Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
(fried in ginger-juice) 480 g
(Jiu Chao) Bu Gu Zhi
 
Fructus et Semen Psoraleae
corydifoliae
 
(fried in wine) 240 g
Hu Tao Rou
 
Semen Juglandis regiae
 
20 g
 
QING GAN TOU DING TANG 
Clearing the Liver Penetrating the Vertex Decoction
Ling Yang Jiao
 
Cornu Antelopis
 
6 g
Shi Jue Ming
 
Concha Haliotidis
 
9 g
Chan Tui
 
Periostracum Cicadae
 
6 g
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
4.5 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
Xia Ku Cao
 
Spica Prunellae vulgaris
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
4.5 g
2365
 
QING GU SAN 
Clearing the Bones Powder
Yin Chai Hu
 
Radix Stellariae dichotomae
 
4.5 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
3 g
Hu Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Picrorhizae
 
3 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
3 g
Qing Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae apiaceae
 
3 g
Qin Jiao
 
Radix Gentianae macrophyllae
 
3 g
Bie Jia
 
Carapax Amydae sinensis
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1.5 g
 
QING HAI WAN 
Clearing the Sea Pill
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
6 g
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
3 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
6 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
6 g
Bei Sha Shen
 
Radix Glehniae
 
6 g
Shi Hu
 
Herba Dendrobii
 
6 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
4.5 g
Long Gu
 
Os Draconis
 
9 g
 
QING HAO BIE JIA TANG 
Artemisia Annua-Carapax Amydae Decoction
Bie Jia
 
Carapax Amydae sinensis
 
15 g
Qing Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae apiaceae
 
6 g
2366
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
12 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
 
QING JING SAN 
Clearing the Menses Powder
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
15 g
Qing Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae apiaceae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
3 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
1.5 g
 
QING LUO YIN 
Clearing the Connecting Channels Decoction
Xian Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae recens
 
6 g
Xian Bian Dou Hua
 
Flos Dolichoris lablab recens
 
6 g
Xi Gua Shuang
 
Mirabilitum Praeparata citrulli
 
6 g
Si Gua Pi
 
Pericarpium Luffae acuntagulae
 
6 g
Xian He Ye
 
Folium Nelumbinis nuciferae recens
 
6 g
Xian Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophateri gracilis recens
 
6 g
 
QING QI HUA TAN TANG 
Clearing Qi and Resolving Phlegm Decoction
Dan Nan Xing
 
Pulvis Arisaemae cum felle bovis
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Gua Lou Ren
 
Semen Trichosanthis
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
4.5 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
2367
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
4.5 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
4.5 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
 
QING RE AN TAI YIN 
Clearing Heat and Calming the Fetus Decoction
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
3 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Ce Bai Ye
 
Cacumen Biotae orientalis
 
6 g
Chun Gen Bai Pi
 
Cortex Ailanthi altissimae
 
6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii Asini
 
6 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
 
QING RE GU JING TANG 
Clearing Heat and Consolidating the Menses Decoction
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
4.5 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
(charred) 6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
6 g
Di Yu
 
Radix Sanguisorbae officinalis
 
6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
6 g
Ou Jie
 
Nodus Nelumbinis nuciferae rhizomatis
 
6 g
Zong Lu Zi
 
Fructus Trachycarpi fortunei
 
4.5 g
Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
(toasted) 12 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
12 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
QING RE TIAO XUE TANG 
Clearing Heat and Regulating Blood Decoction
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
2368
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
4.5 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
6 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
6 g
E Zhu
 
Rhizoma Curcumae zedoariae
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
 
6 g
 
QING WEI SAN 
Clearing the Stomach Powder
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
1.8 g
Sheng Ma
 
Rhizoma Cimicifugae
 
3 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
1.5 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
0.9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
0.9 g
 
QING YING TANG 
Clearing Nutritive-Qi Decoction
Shui Niu Jiao
 
Cornu Bufali
 
18 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
15 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae
 
9 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
6 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
4.5 g
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
3 g
Dan Shen
 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
6 g
 
QING ZAO JIU FEI TANG 
2369
Clearing Dryness and Rescuing the Lungs Decoction
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
9 g
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
7.5 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
3.6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
2.4 g
Hei Zhi Ma
 
Semen Sesami indici
 
3 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
2.1 g
Pi Pa Ye
 
Folium Eriobotryae japonicae
 
3 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
2.1 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
QING ZAO RUN CHANG TANG 
Clearing Dryness and Moistening the Intestines
Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmannia glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
4.5 g
Gua Lou Ren
 
Semen Trichosanthis
 
6 g
Yu Li Ren
 
Semen Pruni
 
6 g
Shi Hu
 
Herba Dendrobi
 
9 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
3 g
Qing Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viride
 
3 g
Jin Ju
 
Fructus Fortunaellae margaritae
 
4.5 g
 
QU TIAO TANG 
Expelling Tapeworms Decoction
Nan Guan Zi
 
Semen Cucurbitae moschatae
 
60 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
30 g
2370
 
REN SHEN BU FEI TANG 
Ginseng Tonifying the Lungs Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
24 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Zi Wan
 
Radix Asteris tatarici
 
6 g
Sang Bai Pi
 
Cortex Mori albae radicis
 
6 g
 
ROU FU BAO YUAN TANG 
Cinnamomum-Aconitum Preserving the Source
Decoction
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
SAN JIA FU MAI TANG 
Three Carapaces Restoring the Pulse Decoction
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
18
g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
18 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
18 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
15 g
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
9 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
9 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
15 g
Bie Jia
 
Carapax Amydae sinensis
 
24 g
Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
30 g
2371
 
SAN MIAO HONG TENG TANG 
Three Wonderful Sargentodoxa Decoction
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis
 
6 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
6 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma-jobi
 
10 g
Hong Teng
 
Caulis Sargentodoxae cuneatae
 
6 g
Xiao Ji
 
Herba Cephalanoplos
 
6 g
Da Ji
 
Herba seu Radix Cirsii japonici
 
6 g
Xian He Cao
 
Herba Agrimoniae pilosulae
 
6 g
Yi Mu Cao
 
Herba Leonuri heterophylli
 
6 g
Xia Ku Cao
 
Spica Prunellae vulgaris
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
Bai Jiang Cao
 
Herba cum Radice Patriniae
 
6 g
 
SAN REN TANG 
Three Seeds Decoction
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
15 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
6 g
Hua Shi
 
Talcum
 
18 g
Tong Cao
 
Medulla Tetrapanacis papyriferi
 
6 g
Bai Dou Kou
 
Fructus Amomi kravanh
 
6 g
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
6 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
18 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
 
SAN ZI YANG QIN TANG 
Three-Seed Nourishing the Ancestors Decoction
Bai Jie Zi
 
Semen Sinapis albae
 
6 g
Su Zi
 
Fructus Perillae frutescentis
 
6 g
Lai Fu Zi
 
Semen Raphani sativi
 
6 g
2372
 
SANG JU YIN 
Morus-Chrysanthemum Decoction
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
7.5 g
Ju Hua
 
Flos Chrysanthemi morifolii
 
3 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
4.5 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
2.4 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
6 g
Lu Gen
 
Rhizoma Phragmitis communis
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
SANG PIAO XIAO SAN 
Ootheca Mantidis Powder
Sang Piao Xiao
 
Ootheca Mantidis
 
9 g
Long Gu
 
Os Draconis
 
12 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos paradicis
 
9 g
Yuan Zhi
 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
3 g
Shi Chang Pu
 
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
6 g
Zhi Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
(honey-fried) 9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
 
SANG XING TANG 
Morus-Prunus Decoction
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
3 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
3 g
Dan Dou Chi
 
Semen Sojae praeparatum
 
3 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
4.5 g
Zhe Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae thunbergii
 
3 g
Nan Sha Shen
 
Radix Adenophorae
 
6 g
Li Pi
 
Fructus Pyri
 
3 g
2373
 
SHA SHEN MAI DONG TANG 
Morus-Prunus Decoction
Sha Shen
 
Radix Adenophorae seu Glehniae
 
9 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Yu Zhu
 
Rhizoma Poligonati odorati
 
6 g
Sang Ye
 
Folium Mori albae
 
4.5 g
Tian Hua Fen
 
Radix Trichosanthis kirilowii
 
4.5 g
Bian Dou
 
Semen Dolichoris lablab
 
4.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
SHAO FU ZHU YU TANG 
Lower Abdomen Eliminating Stasis Decoction
Xiao Hui Xiang
 
Fructus Foeniculi vulgaris
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
2 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
 
6 g
Mo Yao
 
Myrrha
 
6 g
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
6 g
Wu Ling Zhi
 
Excrementum Trogopteri
 
4.5 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
4.5 g
Chi Shao Yao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
6 g
 
SHAO YAO TANG 
Paeonia Decoction
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
30 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
15 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
6 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
15 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
15 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
9 g
2374
Guan Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi loureiroi
 
7.5 g
 
SHE GAN MA HUANG TANG 
Belamcanda-Ephedra Decoction
She Gan
 
Rhizoma Belamcandae chinensis
 
9 g
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
12 g
Zi Wan
 
Radix Asteris tatarici
 
9 g
Kuan Dong Hua
 
Flos Tussilaginis farfarae
 
9 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba cum Radice Asari
 
9 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
3 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
12 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Zizyphi jujubae
 
3 pieces
 
SHEN FU TANG 
Ginseng-Aconitum Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
30 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
15 g
 
SHEN GE SAN 
Ginseng-Gecko Powder
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
12 g
Ge Jie
 
Gecko
 
12 g
 
SHEN LING BAI ZHU SAN 
Ginseng-Poria-Atractylodes Powder
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
10 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
10 g
2375
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
10 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
10
g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
10 g
Bian Dou
 
Semen Dolichoris lablab
 
7.5 g
Lian Zi
 
Semen Nelumbinis nuciferae
 
5 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma jobi
 
5 g
Sha Ren
 
Fructus seu Semen Amomi
 
5 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
5 g
 
SHEN QI SI WU TANG 
Ginseng-Astragalus Four Substances Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Shu Du Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
 
SHENG HUA TANG 
Generating and Resolving Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
24 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
9 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
6 g
Pao Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
(fried) 1.5
g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
1.5 g
 
SHENG MAI SAN 
2376
Generating the Pulse Powder
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
1.5 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
1.5 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
7 seeds
 
SHENG YANG TANG 
Raising the Yang Decoction
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
12 g
Fang Feng
 
Radix Ledebouriellae divaricatae
 
12 g
Qiang Huo
 
Rhizoma et Radix Notopterygii
 
18 g
 
SHENG YU TANG 
Sage Healing Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
1.5 g
Huang Qi
 
Radix Astragali membranacei
 
1.5 g
 
SHI PI YIN 
Bolster the Spleen Decoction
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Mu Gua
 
Fructus Chaenomelis lagenariae
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
6 g
2377
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Da Fu Pi
 
Pericarpium Arecae catechu
 
6 g
Cao Guo
 
Fructus Amomi tsaoko
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
3 dates
 
SHI XIAO SAN 
Breaking into a Smile Powder
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
6 g
Wu Ling Zhi
 
Excrementum Trogopteri
 
6 g
 
SHOU TAI WAN 
Fetus Longevity Pill
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
Sang Ji Sheng
 
Ramulus Sangjisheng
 
6 g
Xu Duan
 
Radix Dipsaci asperi
 
6 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
6 g
 
SI HAI SHU YU WAN 
Four Seas Soothe Stagnation Pill
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Kun Bu
 
Thallus Algae
 
6 g
Hai Dai
 
Zostera marina
 
6 g
Hai Zao
 
Herba Sargassii
 
6 g
Hai Piao Xiao
 
Os Sepiae
 
6 g
Hai Ge Ke
 
Concha Cyclinae sinensis
 
6 g
2378
 
SI JUN ZI TANG 
Four Gentlemen Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
SI MO TANG 
Four Milled-Herb Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
9 g
Chen Xiang
 
Lignum Aquilariae
 
3 g
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
9 g
 
SI NI TANG 
Four Rebellious Decoction
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
4.5 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
 
SI WU MA ZI REN WAN 
Four Substances Cannabis Pill
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
3 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
9 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
4.5 g
2379
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
4.5 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
4.5 g
 
SI WU TANG 
Four Substances Decoction
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
3 g
 
SU HE XIANG WAN 
Styrax Pill (Dosages for batch of pills)
Su He Xiang
 
Styrax liquidis
 
30 g
She Xiang
 
Secretio Moschus
 
60 g
Bing Pian
 
Borneol
 
30 g
An Xi Xiang
 
Benzoinum
 
60 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
60 g
Tan Xiang
 
Lignum Santali albi
 
60 g
Chen Xiang
 
Lignum Aquilariae
 
60 g
Ru Xiang
 
Gummi Olibanum
 
30 g
Ding Xiang
 
Flos Caryophylli
 
60 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
60 g
Bi Ba
 
Fructus Piperis longi
 
60 g
Xi Jiao
 
Cornu Rhinoceri
 
60 g
Zhu Sha
 
Cinnabaris
 
60 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
60 g
He Zi
 
Fructus Terminaliae chebulae
 
60 g
Note
 
: She Xiang, Xi Jiao and Zhu Sha are banned
substances. She Xiang can be replaced by Shi Chang Pu
Rhizoma Acori graminei
 
and Xi Jiao by Shui Niu Jiao
Cornu Bubali
 
.
2380
 
SU ZI JIANG QI TANG 
Perilla-Seed Subduing Qi Decoction
Su Zi
 
Fructus Perillae frutescentis
 
9 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
6 g
Qian Hu
 
Radix Peucedani
 
6 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
2
slices
Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae
 
5 leaves
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
1 date
 
SUO GONG ZHU YU TANG 
Contracting the Uterus and Eliminating Stasis
Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
6 g
Wu Ling Zhi
 
Excrementum Trogopteri seu Pteromi
 
6 g
Dang Shen
 
Radix Codonopsis pilosulae
 
6 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
4.5 g
Yi Mu Cao
 
Herba Leonuri heterophylli
 
6 g
 
SUO QUAN WAN 
Contracting the Spring Pill
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
9 g
Yi Zhi Ren
 
Fructus Alpiniae oxyphyllae
 
9 g
2381
 
TAO HE CHENG QI TANG 
Prunus Conducting Qi Decoction
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
50 pieces
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
12 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
6 g
Mang Xiao
 
Mirabilitum
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
 
TAO HONG SI WU TANG 
Persica-Carthamus Four Substances Decoction
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
12 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
10 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
8 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
6 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
4 g
 
TIAN DI JIAN 
Heaven and Earth Decoction
Tian Men Dong
 
Tuber Asparagus cochinchinensis
 
9 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
 
TIAN MA GOU TENG YIN 
Gastrodia-Uncaria Decoction
Tian Ma
 
Rhizoma Gastrodiae elatae
 
9 g
Gou Teng
 
Ramulus Uncariae
 
9 g
Shi Jue Ming
 
Concha Haliotidis
 
6 g
Sang Ji Sheng
 
Ramulus Loranthi
 
9 g
2382
Du Zhong
 
Radix Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
9 g
Chuan Niu Xi
 
Radix Cyathulae
 
9 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Yi Mu Cao
 
Herba Leonori heterophylli
 
9 g
Ye Jiao Teng
 
Caulis Polygoni multiflori
 
9 g
Fu Shen
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos pararadicis
 
6 g
 
TIAN TAI WU YAO SAN 
Top-Quality Lindera Powder
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
15 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
15 g
Xiao Hui Xiang
 
Fructus Foeniculi vulgaris
 
15 g
Qing Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viride
 
15 g
Gao Liang Jiang
 
Rhizoma Alpiniae officinari
 
15 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
2 pieces
Jin Ling Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
10 pieces
 
TIAN WANG BU XIN DAN 
Heavenly Emperor Tonifying the Heart Pill
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
12 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
6 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Tian Men Dong
 
Tuber Asparagi cochinchinensis
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Dan Shen
 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
6 g
Bai Zi Ren
 
Semen Biotae orientalis
 
6 g
Suan Zao Ren
 
Semen Ziziphi spinosae
 
6 g
Yuan Zhi
 
Radix Polygalae tenuifoliae
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
2383
 
TIAO WEI CHENG QI TANG 
Regulating the Stomach Conducting Qi Decoction
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
12 g
Mang Xiao
 
Mirabilitum
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
 
TIAO ZHENG SAN 
Regulating the Upright Powder
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Zhe Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae Thunbergii
 
6 g
Yi Yi Ren
 
Semen Coicis lachryma-jobi
 
12 g
 
TONG YOU TANG 
Penetrating the Depth Decoction
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
1.5 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
1.5 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
3 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmannia glutinosae praeparata
3 g
Sheng Ma
 
Rhizoma Cimicifugae
 
6 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Bing Lang
 
Semen Arecae catechu
 
3 g
 
TU SI ZI WAN 
Cuscuta Pill
2384
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
Lu Rong
 
Cornu Cervi parvum
 
3 g
Rou Cong Rong
 
Herba Cistanches deserticolae
 
6 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
3 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
3 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
3 g
Sang Piao Xiao
 
Ootheca Mantidis
 
3 g
Yi Zhi Ren
 
Fructus Alpiniae oxyphyllae
 
3 g
Duan Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
(calcined) 6 g
Ji Nei Jin
 
Endothelium cornei Gigeriae galli
 
1.5 g
 
WEI LING SAN 
Stomach Poria Powder
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
4 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
2.3 g
Zhu Ling
 
Sclerotium Polypori umbellati
 
2.3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
2.3 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis lanceae
 
12 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
9 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
WEI LING TANG 
Stomach ‘Ling’ Decoction
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
6 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
6 g
2385
Zhu Ling
 
Sclerotium Polypori umbellati
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnolia officinalis
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
3 pieces
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
 
WEN DAN TANG 
Warming the Gall Bladder Decoction
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
5 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
Zhu Ru
 
Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis
 
6 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
5
slices
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
1 date
 
WEN PI TANG 
Warming the Spleen Decoction
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
12 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
6 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
9 g
 
WEN YANG BU GAN JIAN 
Warming Yang and Tonifying the Liver Decoction
2386
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassaie
 
3 g
Yin Yang Huo
 
Herba Epimedii
 
6 g
Zi Shi Ying
 
Fluoritum
 
6 g
She Chuang Zi
 
Fructus Cnidii monnieri
 
4.5 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Mu Gua
 
Fructus Chaenomelis
 
6 g
 
WU HU TANG 
Five Tigers Decoction
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
2.1 g
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
4.5 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1.2 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
1 date
Xi Cha
 
Fine green tea 2.4 g
 
WU LING SAN 
Five-Ingredient Poria Powder
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
4 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
2.3 g
Zhu Ling
 
Sclerotium Polypori umbellati
 
2.3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
2.3 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
1.5 g
 
WU MEI WAN 
Prunus Mume Pill
Wu Mei
 
Fructus Pruni mume
 
24 g
Chuan Jiao
 
Pericarpium Zanthoxyli bungeani
 
1.5 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba Asari cum radice
 
1.5 g
2387
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
9 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
6 g
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
3 g
 
WU REN WAN 
Five-Seed Pill
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
9 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
9 g
Bai Zi Ren
 
Semen Biotae orientalis
 
6 g
Song Zi Ren
 
Semen Pini tabulaeformis
 
3 g
Yu Li Ren
 
Semen Pruni
 
3 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
9 g
 
WU YAO SAN 
Linderia Powder
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
Su Zi
 
Fructus Perillae frutescentis
 
4.5 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
3 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
6 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
3 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
3 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
2388
 
WU ZHU YU TANG 
Evodia Decoction
Wu Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Evodiae rutaecarpae
 
9 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
3 dates
 
WU ZI YAN ZONG WAN 
Five-Seed Developing Ancestors Pill
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
240 g
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
30 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
240 g
Fu Pen Zi
 
Fructus Rubi chingii
 
120 g
Che Qian Zi
 
Semen Plantaginis
 
60 g
 
XI JIAO DI HUANG TANG 
Cornus Rhinoceri-Rehmannia Decoction
Shui Niu Jiao
 
Cornu Bufali
 
6 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
24 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
6 g
 
XIANG LENG WAN 
Aucklandia-Sparganium Pill
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Ding Xiang
 
Flos Caryophylli
 
3 g
San Leng
 
Rhizoma Sparganii stoloniferi
 
6 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
6 g
Qing Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae viride
 
3 g
Chuan Lian Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
3 g
Xiao Hui Xiang
 
Fructus Foeniculi vulgaris
 
6 g
2389
E Zhu
 
Rhizoma Curcumae ezhu
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
 
XIAO CHAI HU TANG 
Small Bupleurum Decoction
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
24 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
9 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
24 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
9
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
12 pieces
 
XIAO JIAN ZHONG TANG 
Small Strengthening the Centre Decoction
Yi Tang
 
Saccharum granorum
 
18 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
18 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
6
g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
12 dates
 
XIAO QING LONG TANG 
Small Green Dragon Decoction
Ma Huang
 
Herba Ephedrae
 
9 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
9 g
Xi Xin
 
Herba Asari cum radice
 
3 g
2390
Wu Wei Zi
 
Fructus Schisandrae chinensis
 
6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
XIAO YAO SAN 
Free and Easy Wanderer Powder
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
15 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
3
slices
 
XIE BAI SAN 
Draining the White Powder
Sang Bai Pi
 
Cortex Mori albae radicis
 
30 g
Di Gu Pi
 
Cortex Lycii radicis
 
30 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Geng Mi
 
Non-glutinous rice 15 g
 
XIE HUANG SAN 
Draining Yellowness Powder
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
15 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
6 g
Fang Feng
 
Radix Ledebouriellae divaricatae
 
12 g
2391
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
12 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
XIE XIN TANG 
Draining the Heart Decoction
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
3 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
3 g
 
XIN YI QING FEI YIN 
Magnolia Decoction to Clear the Lung
Xin Yi Hua
 
Flos Magnoliae liliflorae
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
4.5 g
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
15 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
6 g
Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae
 
6 g
Yu Xing Cao
 
Herba cum Radice Houttuyniae cordatae
 
6 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
 
XING SU SAN 
Prunus-Perilla Powder
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae frutescentis
 
6 g
Qian Hu
 
Radix Peucedani
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
6 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
6 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
6 g
2392
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
2 dates
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
XUAN FU DAI ZHE TANG 
Inula-Hematite Decoction
Xuan Fu Hua
 
Flos Inulae
 
9 g
Dai Zhe Shi
 
Haematitum
 
3 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
6 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
12 dates
 
XUE FU ZHU YU TANG 
Blood Mansion Eliminating Stasis Decoction
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
9 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
5 g
Tao Ren
 
Semen Persicae
 
12 g
Hong Hua
 
Flos Carthami tinctorii
 
9 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
3 g
Zhi Ke
 
Fructus Citri aurantii
 
6 g
Niu Xi
 
Radix Achyranthis bidentatae seu Cyathulae
 
9 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
YAN HU SUO TANG 
Corydalis Decoction
Yan Hu Suo
 
Rhizoma Corydalis yanhusuo
 
45 g
2393
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
15 g
Chi Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae rubrae
 
15 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
15 g
Guan Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi loureiroi
 
15 g
Jiang Huang
 
Rhizoma Curcumae longae
 
90 g
Ru Xiang
 
Gummi Olibanum
 
90 g
Mo Yao
 
Myrrha
 
90 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
90 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
7.5 g
 
YANG YIN QING FEI TANG 
Nourishing Yin and Clearing the Lungs Decoction
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
4.5 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
3.6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
2.4 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
2.4 g
Zhe Bei Mu
 
Bulbus Fritillariae thunbergii
 
2.4 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
1.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1.5 g
 
YI GAN SAN 
Restraining the Liver Powder
Bai Zhu
 
(fried) 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
3 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
3 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
3 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
2.4 g
Gou Teng
 
Ramulus Uncariae
 
3 g
Chai Hu
 
Radix Bupleuri
 
1.5 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
1.5 g
2394
 
YI GUAN JIAN 
One Linking Decoction
Bei Sha Shen
 
Radix Glehniae littoralis
 
10 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
10 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
10 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
30 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
12 g
Chuan Lian Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
5 g
 
YI JIA ZHENG QI SAN 
First Variation Upright Qi Powder
Huo Xiang
 
Herba Agastachis seu Pogostemi
 
6 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
6 g
Xing Ren
 
Semen Pruni armeniacae
 
6 g
Fu Ling Pi
 
Cortex Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
6 g
Shen Qu
 
Massa Fermentata medicinalis
 
4.5 g
Mai Ya
 
Fructus Hordei vulgaris germinatus
 
4.5 g
Yin Chen Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
6 g
Da Fu Pi
 
Pericarpium Arecae catechu
 
3 g
 
YI WEI TANG 
Benefiting the Stomach Decoction
Sha Shen
 
Radix Adenophorae seu Glehniae
 
9 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
15 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
15 g
Yu Zhu
 
Rhizoma Polygonati odorati
 
4.5 g
Bing Tang
 
Rock candy
 
3 g
 
YI YIN JIAN 
One Yin Decoction
2395
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
6 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Huai Niu Xi
 
Radix Achyranthis bidentatae
 
4.5 g
Dan Shen
 
Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae
 
6 g
 
YIN CHEN HAO TANG 
Artemisia Yinchenhao Decoction
Yin Chen Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
9 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
6 g
 
YIN JIA WAN 
Lonicera-Amyda Pill
Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae
 
6 g
Bie Jia
 
Carapacis Amydae sinensis
 
9 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
6 g
Sheng Ma
 
Rhizoma Cimicifugae
 
6 g
Hong Teng
 
Caulis Sargentodoxae cuneatae
 
6 g
Pu Gong Ying
 
Herba Taraxaci mongolici cum Radice
 
6 g
Da Qing Ye
 
Folium Daqingye
 
6 g
Yin Chen Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae yinchenhao
 
4.5 g
Hu Po
 
Succinum
 
6 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
Zi Hua Di Ding
 
Herba cum Radice Violae yedoensitis
 
6 g
Pu Huang
 
Pollen Typhae
 
6 g
Chun Gen Bai Pi
 
Cortex Ailanthi altissimae
 
6 g
2396
 
YIN QIAO SAN 
Lonicera-Forsythia Powder
Jin Yin Hua
 
Flos Lonicerae japonicae
 
9 g
Lian Qiao
 
Fructus Forsythiae suspensae
 
9 g
Jie Geng
 
Radix Platycodi grandiflori
 
3 g
Niu Bang Zi
 
Fructus Arctii lappae
 
9 g
Bo He
 
Herba Menthae haplocalycis
 
3 g
Dan Dou Chi
 
Semen Sojae praeparatum
 
3 g
Jing Jie
 
Herba seu Flos Schizonepetae tenuifoliae
 
6 g
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
3 g
Lu Gen
 
Rhizoma Phragmitis communis
 
15 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
 
YOU GUI WAN 
Restoring the Right [Kidney] Pill
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
3 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
Du Zhong
 
Cortex Eucommiae ulmoidis
 
6 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
4.5 g
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae chinensis
 
6 g
Lu Jiao Jiao
 
Colla Corni Cervi
 
6 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
6 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
4.5
 
YU NU JIAN 
Jade Woman Decoction
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
15 g
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
9 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
3 g
2397
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
6 g
Huai Niu Xi
 
Radix Achyranthis bidentatae
 
3 g
 
YUE JU WAN 
Gardenia-Ligusticum Pill
Cang Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis lanceae
 
6 g
Chuan Xiong
 
Radix Ligustici chuanxiong
 
6 g
Xiang Fu
 
Rhizoma Cyperi rotundi
 
6 g
Shan Zhi Zi
 
Fructus Gardeniae jasminoidis
 
6 g
Shen Qu
 
Massa Fermentata medicinalis
 
6 g
 
ZENG YE TANG 
Increasing Fluids Decoction
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
18 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
12 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
12 g
 
ZHEN GAN XI FENG TANG 
Pacifying the Liver and Extinguishing Wind Decoction
Huai Niu Xi
 
Radix Achyrantis bidentatae
 
15 g
Dai Zhe Shi
 
Haematitum
 
15 g
Long Gu
 
Os Draconis
 
12 g
Mu Li
 
Concha Ostreae
 
12 g
Gui Ban
 
Plastrum Testudinis
 
12 g
Xuan Shen
 
Radix Scrophulariae ningpoensis
 
12 g
Tian Men Dong
 
Tuber Asparagi cochinchinensis
 
12 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
12 g
Yin Chen Hao
 
Herba Artemisiae capillaris
 
6 g
Chuan Lian Zi
 
Fructus Meliae toosendan
 
6 g
Mai Ya
 
Fructus Hordei vulgaris germinatus
 
6 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
6 g
2398
 
ZHEN REN YANG ZANG TANG 
True Person Nourishing the Organs Decoction
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
3 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
9 g
Rou Gui
 
Cortex Cinnamoni cassiae
 
3 g
Wei Rou Dou Kou
 
Semen Myristicae fragrantis
 
9 g
He Zi
 
Fructus Terminaliae chebulae
 
6 g
(Zhi) Ying Su Ke
 
Pericarpium Papaveris somniferi
(honey-fried) 6 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
Dang Gui
 
Radix Angelicae sinensis
 
6 g
Mu Xiang
 
Radix Aucklandiae lappae
 
6 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
ZHEN WU TANG 
True Warrior Decoction
Fu Zi
 
Radix lateralis Aconiti carmichaeli praeparata
 
9 g
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Bai Shao
 
Radix Paeoniae lactiflorae
 
9 g
 
ZHENG QI TIAN XIANG SAN 
Upright Qi Heavenly Fragrance Powder
Wu Yao
 
Radix Linderae strychnifoliae
 
6 g
Gan Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis
 
3 g
Zi Su Ye
 
Folium Perillae
 
6 g
Chen Pi
 
Pericarpium Citri reticulatae
 
4.5 g
 
ZHI BO DI HUANG WAN 
2399
Eight-Ingredient Rehmannia Pill (Anemarrhena-
Phellodendron-Rehmannia Pill)
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
24 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
12 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
12 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
9 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
9 g
Mu Dan Pi
 
Cortex Moutan radicis
 
9 g
Zhi Mu
 
Radix Anemarrhenae asphodeloidis
 
9 g
Huang Bo
 
Cortex Phellodendri
 
9 g
 
ZHI GAN CAO TANG 
Glycyrrhiza Decoction
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
12
g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
9 g
Sheng Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae
 
48 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
E Jiao
 
Gelatinum Corii asini
 
6 g
Huo Ma Ren
 
Semen Cannabis sativae
 
9 g
Sheng Jiang
 
Rhizoma Zingiberis officinalis recens
 
9 g
Da Zao
 
Fructus Ziziphi jujubae
 
30 dates
 
ZHI SHI DAO ZHI WAN 
Citrus Eliminating Stagnation Pill
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
12 g
Da Huang
 
Radix et Rhizoma Rhei
 
15 g
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
6 g
Huang Qin
 
Radix Scutellariae baicalensis
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Ze Xie
 
Rhizoma Alismatis orientalis
 
6 g
2400
Bai Zhu
 
Rhizoma Atractylodis macrocephalae
 
6 g
Shen Qu
 
Massa Fermentata Medicinalis
 
12 g
 
ZHI SHI GUA LOU GUI ZHI TANG 
Citrus-Trichosanthes-Ramulus Cinnamomi Decoction
Gua Lou
 
Fructus Trichosanthis
 
12 g
Xie Bai
 
Bulbus Allii
 
9 g
Zhi Shi
 
Fructus Citri aurantii immaturus
 
12 g
Hou Po
 
Cortex Magnoliae officinalis
 
12 g
Gui Zhi
 
Ramulus Cinnamomi cassiae
 
3 g
 
ZHU YE SHI GAO TANG 
Lophaterus-Gypsum Decoction
Zhu Ye
 
Herba Lophatheri gracilis
 
9 g
Shi Gao
 
Gypsum fibrosum
 
30 g
Ren Shen
 
Radix Ginseng
 
6 g
Mai Men Dong
 
Tuber Ophiopogonis japonici
 
9 g
Ban Xia
 
Rhizoma Pinelliae ternatae
 
9 g
Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis
 
3 g
Geng Mi
 
Semen Oryzae sativae
 
12 g
 
ZUO GUI WAN 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Pill
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
15 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
9 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
9 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
9 g
Chuan Niu Xi
 
Radix Cyathulae
 
6 g
Tu Si Zi
 
Semen Cuscutae sinensis
 
9 g
2401
Lu Jiao Jiao
 
Colla Cornu cervi
 
9 g
Gui Ban Jiao
 
Colla Plastri testudinis
 
9 g
 
ZUO GUI YIN 
Restoring the Left [Kidney] Decoction
Shu Di Huang
 
Radix Rehmanniae glutinosae praeparata
6 g
Shan Yao
 
Radix Dioscoreae oppositae
 
6 g
Gou Qi Zi
 
Fructus Lycii chinensis
 
6 g
Fu Ling
 
Sclerotium Poriae cocos
 
6 g
Shan Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Corni officinalis
 
3 g
Zhi Gan Cao
 
Radix Glycyrrhizae uralensis praeparata
 
3
g
 
ZUO JIN WAN 
Left Metal Pill
Huang Lian
 
Rhizoma Coptidis
 
15 g
Wu Zhu Yu
 
Fructus Evodiae rutaecarpae
 
2 g
2402
APPENDIX 3
HISTORY OF
DIAGNOSIS IN
CHINESE MEDICINE
This appendix (adapted from Deng Tie Tao 1988 ‘Practical
Chinese Medicine Diagnosis’ 
Shi Yong Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
,
Shanghai Science Publishing House, Shanghai) will give a short
historical overview of the development of diagnosis in Chinese
medicine.
 
1
 
I will discuss the following historical aspects of
diagnosis:
 
• 
 
pulse diagnosis
• 
 
channel diagnosis
• 
 
tongue diagnosis.
PULSE DIAGNOSIS
Pulse diagnosis is an extremely important diagnostic method in
Chinese medicine. It is an incredibly sophisticated and accurate
diagnostic tool that has undergone an interrupted historical
development from the Zhou dynasty (11th century–771
BC
 
)
onwards.
Pulse Diagnosis In Early Times
It is still not certain when the pulse was first referred to as a
diagnostic tool. Some scholars think that pulse diagnosis was
2403
practised as early as the Zhou dynasty (11th century–771
BC
 
). The
ancient book called ‘Rites of Zhou’ says in a chapter entitled
‘Medical Matters’: 
‘
Determine the prognosis of patients according
to the five kinds of Qi, five kinds of sounds and five kinds of colours;
also refer to the changes of the nine orifices and the pulsation of the
nine internal organs
 
.’
 
Some historians interpret the expression
‘refer to the pulsation’ as meaning the palpation of the pulse.
Bian Que
The historian Si Ma Qian writes about the ancient doctor Bian Que
in his book ‘Historical Records’ (
Shi Ji
 
) as being the earliest expert
of pulse diagnosis. This view is supported in other texts. For
example, Han Fei of the Warring States period (476–221
BC
 
) made
similar statements in his book ‘Works of Han Fei’ (
Han Fei Zi)
 
. The
book ‘Works of Prince Huai Nan’ (
Huai Nan Zi
 
) by Liu An says
that Bian Que could diagnose diseases by taking the pulse.
Bian Que, also known as Qin Yue Ren, lived in the 5th century 
BC
during the transition between the Spring and Autumn period and
the Warring States period. He was a well-known medical
practitioner of his time, who travelled widely and became an
expert in internal medicine, surgery, gynecology, paediatrics and
diseases of the elderly.
Ma Wang Dui texts
Three texts unearthed from the tomb of Ma Wang Dui deal with
pulse diagnosis: ‘Methods of Pulse Taking’ (
Mai Fa
 
), ‘Fatal Signs
of Yin and Yang Pulses’ (
Yin Yang Mai Si Hou
 
) and ‘Moxibustion
Book of the 11 Channels of the Foot and Hand’ (
Zu Bi Shi Yi Mai Jiu
Jing
 
). These three classics were unearthed from the no. 3 tomb of
Ma Wang Dui and, although they were written anonymously, we
know that they predate the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine’ (
Huang Di Nei Jing
 
).
‘Fatal Signs of Yin and Yang Pulses’ and ‘Moxibustion Book of
the 11 Channels of the Foot and Hand’ discuss the importance of
the pulse in making a prognosis. For example, the ‘Moxibustion
Book of the 11 Channels of the Foot and Hand’ says that if the
pulse is disrupted due to a disease of the three Yin, death will
impend in less than 10 days; if the rhythm of the pulse feels like
2404
three people pounding grain, death will impend in less than 3
days; if the pulse feels like the one felt right after eating, death will
impend in less than 3 days. The pulse described as feeling ‘like
three 
people pounding grain’ could be the earliest record of
arrhythmia in China. This image gives a vivid description of the
pulse felt in arrhythmia, by conjuring up the rhythm and sound
produced by three people working together to pound grain.
There is a description of a similar pulse in 
Chapter 20
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’, namely a pulse that hits the finger like the
rhythm of three people pounding grain in a mortar: this indicates
that the disease is quite severe.
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic Of Internal
Medicine (
 
Huang Qi Nei Jing Su Wen
 
)
There are many chapters in the ‘Simple Questions’ (
Su Wen
 
) and
‘Spiritual Axis’ (
Ling Shu
 
) that deal with pulse diagnosis.
For example, 
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ says that the
pulse should be taken in the early morning 
‘
when the Yin Qi is not
disturbed, the Yang Qi is not dissipated, the stomach is empty, the
Qi of the channels is not full, the Qi of the Connecting channels is
even and quiet and the circulation of Qi and Blood is not disrupted
yet
 
’.
 
2
 
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’ recommends
evaluating the pulse according to the breathing.
In the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’ the pulse
was taken on nine different arteries in nine different locations of
the body. These were called the ‘nine regions’ as described in
Chapter 20
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’: 
‘
There are three areas in the
body, each area is divided into three which makes nine regions:
these are used to determine life and death [i.e. prognosis], and in
them, 100 diseases manifest, Deficiency and Excess are regulated
and the pathogenic factors can be expelled
 
.’
 
3
Chapter 19
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ recommends taking the pulse
at ST-9 Renying (carotid artery) and around the area of LU-9
Taiyuan, which the text called ‘Portal of Qi’ (
Qi Kou
 
) or ‘Portal of
Inch’ (
Cun Kou
 
) where the radial artery runs. Renying reflects Yang
Qi whereas Qi Kou reflects Yin Qi. 
Chapter 48
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’ also says that the 
Cun Kou
 
pulse reflects the state of the Yin
2405
organs whereas the Renying pulse reflects that of the Yang organs.
Later, Zhang Zhong Jing on the basis of the above theories
developed pulse diagnosis at three locations, that is, at Renying
(ST-9) and Fuyang (BL-59) to evaluate the Qi of the Stomach and at
Cun Kou
 
to evaluate the state of the 12 Channels.
There are passages in the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine’ which attribute the greatest importance to the pulse of
the radial artery, that is, the 
Cun Kou
 
(or 
Qi Kou
 
) pulse. The
importance attributed to this pulse is a precursor of the division of
the arterial pulse at the wrist into three sections. For example,
Chapter 3
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says that we should check the
quality of the 
Cun Kou
 
pulse (big or small, slow or rapid, slippery
or choppy) to find the cause of the disease. 
Chapter 5
 
of the
‘Simple Questions’ has a similar statement.
Chapter 21
 
of ‘Simple Questions’ says 
‘
The balance of Qi, Blood,
Yin and Yang can be gauged from the pulse at Qi Kou. Through the
pulse at Qi Kou we can formulate a prognosis of the disease
 
.’
 
4
Chapter 18
 
of the same text says: 
‘
We can understand a disease
from the fullness or emptiness of the pulse at Cun Kou
 
’.
 
5
 
All these
are examples of pulse diagnosis at 
Qi Kou
 
: it is interesting to note
that only the Front (
Cun
 
) and Rear (
Chi
 
) positions of the pulse are
mentioned, without any mention of the Middle (
Guan
 
) position;
moreover, the Front position is more important than the Rear one.
The ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’ reports at
least 30 different pulse qualities, many of which are not used
nowadays. These include Big, Small, Long, Short, Slippery, Choppy,
Floating, Deep, Slow, Rapid, Flourishing, Firm, Tight, Soft, Slowed-
down, Abrupt, Deficient, Excessive, Scattered, Knotted, Thin,
Weak, Transverse, Asthmatic, Wiry, Hook-like, Feather-like, Stone-
like, Hurried, Surging, Full, Throbbing, Thick, Suspended and
Feeble. There are vivid descriptions of the feeling when the pulse
hits the finger: for example, the Wiry Pulse is ‘rigid, straight and
long’, the Hook-like pulse ‘surging on and fading away’, the
Feather-like pulse ‘light and feeble like a feather’, the Stone-like
pulse ‘like a stone being thrown’, etc.
Pulse Diagnosis In Han, Jin, Sui And Tang
2406
Dynasties
Yi Chun Yu
Yi Chun Yu was a famous practitioner living in the beginning of
the Han dynasty. He followed the theories on pulse diagnosis
handed down from previous dynasties, and developed his own rich
experiences in his practice. He said ‘When I treat patients, I must
first palpate the patient’s pulse, and then give the treatment
accordingly’. More than 20 different pulse qualities are found in
his records such as Wiry, Big, Deep, 
Intermittent, Tight, Small,
Weak, Abrupt, Slippery, Rapid, Full, Firm, Scattered, etc. Yi Chun
Yu palpated the pulse at the 
Cun Kou
 
position and differentiated
between the pulse felt at the superficial and deep levels.
Pulse Diagnosis In The ‘Classic Of
Difficulties’ (
Nan Jing
 
)
The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ marked an extremely important
milestone in the history of pulse diagnosis because it established
for the first time pulse diagnosis based on the radial artery pulse
at the wrist divided into three sections (
Cun, Guan
 
and 
Chi
 
) and
three levels. These were the new ‘nine regions’ of the pulse; in
other words, whereas in the times of the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic
of Internal Medicine’ the ‘nine regions’ were nine different arteries
in different places of the body, henceforth they were all on the
radial artery at the wrist.
So, the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ (
AD
 
100) established for the first
time the practice of taking the pulse at the radial artery: as
mentioned above, this pulse was variously called 
Qi Kou
 
(‘Portal of
Qi’), 
Cun Kou
 
(‘Portal of Inch [Front pulse position]’) and 
Mai Kou
(‘Portal of Pulse’). The ‘Classic of Difficulties’ says: 
‘
The 12 main
channels have their own arteries but the pulse can be taken only at
the Cun Kou [LU-9 position] reflecting the life and death of the 5 Yin
and 6 Yang organs … The Cun Kou is the beginning and end point of
the energy of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs and that is why we can
take the pulse at this position only
 
.’
 
6
 
The last part of this
statement is interesting since the description of the pulse of the
Cun Kou
 
is described as the ‘beginning and end point of the energy
2407
of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs’; this seems to imply an
understanding of the circulation of blood as a closed circuit.
Chapter 1
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ explains why the pulse is
felt at 
Cun Kou
 
:
Twelve channels have places where a pulse can be felt and yet
one selects only the Cun Kou to determine the state of the 5 Yin
and 6 Yang organs, why is this? The Cun Kou constitutes the
great meeting place of the vessels, it is the place where the
pulse of the Hand Greater Yin [Lungs] beats … the Cun Kou is
the beginning and end of the 5 Yin and 6 Yang organs and
therefore only the Cun Kou is used [for diagnosis].
 
7
The second chapter of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ explains how
its author arrived at feeling the pulse at the three positions called
Inch or Front, Gate or Middle and Foot or Rear (
Cun, Guan
 
and 
Chi
):
The Foot and Inch sections of the pulse are the meeting point of
the channels. The distance from the Gate position [LU-8, level
with the radial apophysis] to the Foot position in the elbow
represents the Foot-Interior and it reflects the Yin energies. The
distance from the Gate position to the point Fish Margin [the
thenar eminence] is the Foot-Exterior and it reflects the Yang
energies. Hence, the distance of 1 inch is separated from the
distance of 1 foot [from the Gate position to the elbow crease],
so that the distance of 1 foot is represented by 1 inch. Hence the
Yin energies are reflected within that 1-inch section of the foot-
long section and the Yang energies are reflected within a 9-fen
[nine-tenths of an inch] section of the Inch section. The total
length of the Foot and Inch section extends over 1 inch and 9
fen; hence one speaks of Foot and Inch sections.
 
8
In other words, the distance from the Gate-
Guan
 
(or Middle)
position of the pulse (on LU-8 Jingqu) to the crease of the elbow
measures 1 Chinese foot and reflects the Yin energies; the distance
from the Gate-
Guan
 
position to the crease of the wrist is 9 
fen
2408
(nine-tenths of an inch) and reflects the Yang energies. However, a
1-inch section is separated from the 1-foot distance from the Gate-
Guan
 
position to the elbow crease to represent the Yin energies; in
other words, this 1-inch section is representative of the 1-foot
section.
Chapter 18
 
of the ‘Classic of Difficulties’ describes the three
different pressures applied to the pulse:
There are three sections, Inch, Gate and Foot, and three
pressures, superficial, middle and deep [which makes] 9 regions.
The Upper section pertains to Heaven and reflects diseases
from the chest to the head; the Middle section pertains to
Person and reflects diseases from the diaphragm to the
umbilucus; the Lower section pertains to Earth and reflects
diseases from the umbilicus to the feet. [One must] examine
[these sections] before needling.
 
9
This passage establishes clearly the principle, adopted by all
successive doctors, that the Inch section of the pulse corresponds
to the Upper Burner and diseases from the chest upwards, the
Gate section to the Middle Burner and diseases from the
diaphragm to the umbilicus, and the Foot section to the Lower
Burner and diseases from the umbilicus to the feet.
Zhang Zhong Jing
Zhang Zhong Jing discusses pulse diagnosis in many passages of
his celebrated ‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang Han
Lun
 
). He emphasized 
paying equal attention to the pulse as to
clinical manifestations when identifying patterns; in particular, he
put the most emphasis on the pulse at 
Cun Kou
 
.
In all, Zhang Zhong Jing mentions more than 20 pulse qualities
in his book and he classified them into two broad groups of Yang
(e.g. Big, Floating, Rapid, Slippery, etc.) and Yin pulse qualities (e.g.
Deep, Choppy, Weak, etc.).
Zhang Zhong Jing was good at using pulse diagnosis to analyse
the aetiology and pathology of a disease and to guide treatment.
For example he says: 
‘
When the pulse is Floating and Tight at the
Cun Kou, the Floating quality indicates Wind while the Tight
2409
quality Cold
 
’
 
.
Moreover, Zhang Zhong Jing also paid attention to the
correlation between pulse and body shape. For example, he said 
‘
If
a fat person displays a Floating pulse and a thin person a Deep one,
this should draw our attention. In general, fat people are likely to
have a Deep pulse while thin people a Floating pulse
 
.’
Zhang Zhong Jing also made an interesting correlation between
pulse quality and the emotional causes of disease. He says: 
‘
In case
of shock the pulse will be Fine and the complexion pale; in case of
shame, the pulse will be Floating and the complexion red
 
.’
The ‘Pulse Classic’ (
Mai Jing
 
)
The ‘Pulse Classic’ (
Mai Jing
 
) was written by Wang Shu He at the
juncture between the Han and Jin dynasties, in approximately 
AD
280. This is the first text dedicated entirely to pulse diagnosis. This
book had a great influence on the study of pulse diagnosis not
only in Chinese medicine but also in Arabic and Persian medicine.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ consolidated and further clarified the
division of the pulse in three sections and the organs assigned to
each section. This book assigns the Heart and Small Intestine to
the left Front position, the Liver and Gall-Bladder to the left
Middle position, the Kidneys and Bladder to the left Rear position,
the Lungs and Large Intestine to the right Front positions, the
Spleen and Stomach to the right Middle position, and the Kidneys,
Bladder and Triple Burner to the right Rear position.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ mentioned 24 pulse qualities and described
their feeling and clinical significance in a systematic way for the
first time. The pulse qualities included Floating, Hollow, Surging,
Slippery, Rapid, Hurried, Wiry, Tight, Deep, Hidden, Leather-like,
Full, Feeble, Choppy, Fine, Soft, Weak, Deficient, Scattered,
Slowed-down, Slow, Knotted, Intermittent and Throbbing. The
descriptions used for such pulse qualities became the standard for
later texts on pulse diagnosis. Wang Shu He also systematically
compared and contrasted similar pulse qualities to make their
differentiation easier.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ also described the clinical significance of
each pulse quality systematically. For example, it says: 
‘
The Slow
pulse indicates Cold, the Choppy pulse deficiency of Blood, the
2410
Slowed-down pulse Deficiency, and the Surging pulse Heat
 
’
 
.
The ‘Thousand Golden Ducats Prescriptions’ (
Qian Jin
Fang
 
)
The book ‘Thousand Golden Ducats Prescriptions’ by Sun Si Miao
consolidated and expanded the ‘Pulse Classic’ views on the three
sections of the pulse, the three depths applied to finger pressure
and the assignment of organs to pulse positions. Sun Si Miao
emphasized the importance of pulse diagnosis and the following
excerpt is interesting and apt: 
‘
The pulse is an important tool for
practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine. How can one practise
traditional Chinese medicine without a good understanding of the
pulse? All practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine should
study the pulse carefully
 
.’
Sun Si Miao associated the pulse positions only with the Yin
organs, with the Heart, Liver and Kidney on the left and Lungs,
Spleen and Gate of Life (
Ming Men
 
) on the right. He correlated the
pulse to body shape and also emotional state:
It is abnormal for people of large size to have a small, Fine
pulse, for thin people to have a Big pulse, for happy people to
have a Deficient pulse, for unhappy people to have a Full pulse,
for people of hot temper to have a Slowed-down pulse, for calm
people to have an Agitated pulse, for people of strong body
build to have a Fine pulse, and for people of weak body
constitution to have a Big pulse.
Pulse Diagnosis In Song, Yuan, Ming And
Qing Dynasties
During the Song dynasty, pulse diagnosis continued to develop
and many of the rhymes since used as a mnemonic aid were
composed in this time. For example, a collection of rhymes to
memorize pulse qualities and their clinical significance is the
‘Pulse in Verse’ (
Mai Jue
 
) by Cui Jia Yan of the Southern Song
dynasty.
During the Song dynasty, illustrated books on pulse diagnosis
2411
were published for the first time. For example, Xu Shu Wei wrote
the ‘Illustrated Book of 36 Pulses’ (
San Shi Liu Zhong Mai Fa Tu
 
),
which is regarded as the first of these.
During the Ming dynasty, Zhang Shi Xian wrote the ‘Pulse
Verses with Illustrations’ (
Tu Zhu Mai Jue
 
), which contains 22
illustrations. During the Qing Dynasty, He Sheng Ping wrote the
‘Essentials of Pulse with Illustrations’ (
Mai Yao Tu Zhu
 
).
Throughout the Song, Ming and Qing dynasties, doctors were
engaged in trying to make pulse diagnosis easier to master. As
there are between 28 and 32 pulse qualities, many doctors tried to
find some kind of system to memorize them. The simplest
classification was that into Yin and Yang pulses. Another way of
classifying pulse qualities is according to various criteria, such as
rate, rhythm, strength, shape and depth. A third way of
systematizing the pulse qualities is to divide them up into pairs of
opposite qualities (e.g. Slow-Rapid, Floating-Deep, Slippery-
Choppy, Full-Empty, etc.).
The ‘Pulse Classic of the Pin Hu Master’ (
Pin Hu Mai Xue
 
)
written in 1564 by Li Shi Zhen was a landmark in the history of
pulse diagnosis. The book consisted of two parts. The first part was
written by his father Li Yan Wen and it introduced the general
theory of pulse diagnosis, whereas the second part, written by Li
Shi Zhen himself, describes palpation of the pulse and the clinical
significance of 27 pulse qualities. The book was written in the
‘Seven-Word style’, a poetic, lucid and lively style which makes it
easy to learn and memorize.
Works on pulse diagnosis were quite numerous in the Ming and
Qing dynasties. The most well-known of this period include the
following:
 
• 
 
‘About the Pulse’ (
Mai Yu
 
, 1584) by Wu Kun
• 
 
the chapter ‘Discussion on the Spirit of the Pulse’ in
the ‘Complete Works of Jing Yue’ (
Jing Yue Quan Shu
 
,
1624) by Zhang Jie Bin
• 
 
the ‘Orthodox Meaning of the Pulse Theory’ (
Mai Li
Zheng Yi
 
, 1635) by Zou Zhi Kui
• 
 
the ‘Attention for Diagnosticians’ (
Zhen Jia Zheng Yan,
1642) by Li Zhong Zhi
• 
 
the ‘Collection of Pulse Verses’ (
Mai Jue Hui Bian,
2412
1667) compiled by Qu Liang
• 
 
the ‘Thorough Knowledge of the Pulse’ (
Mai Guan,
1711) by Wang Xian
• 
 
the ‘Pulse Studies of Hui Xi’ (
Hui Xi Mai Xue
 
) by Xu
Ling Tai
• 
 
the ‘Seeking the Truth for the Theory of the Pulse’
(
Mai Li Qiu Zhen,
 
1769) by Huang Gong Xiu
• 
 
the ‘Orthodox Classic of the Theory of the Pulse’ (
Mai
Li Zong Jing,
 
1868) by Zhang Futian
• 
 
the ‘Truth about the Theory of the Pulse’ (
Mai Li Cun
Zhen,
 
1876) by Yu Xian Ting
• 
 
the ‘Brief Discussion of the Theory of the Pulse’ (
Mai
Yi Jian Mo,
 
1892) by Zhou Xue Hai.
During the Ming and Qing dynasties, feudal customs became
very strict with regard to relations between men and women. It
was considered improper for a doctor (in those times a man) to
palpate the body of women. Sometimes even the interrogation of
the patient was conducted through the intermediary of family
members.
As for pulse diagnosis, this was often carried out by interposing
a thin piece of silk on the woman’s wrist to act as a barrier between
her wrist and the doctor’s fingers. During the Ming dynasty, Li
Chan said in ‘Rules for the Practice of Medicine’ (
Xi Yi Gui Ge
 
):
When a woman is treated, her symptoms, appetite and the
tongue picture were asked about through her family members.
Then the treatment was given accordingly. Sometimes in a
severe case, the practitioner diagnoses the patient through the
bed curtain, or in a mild case, through the door curtain. In both
conditions, a thin piece of silk is used to cover the wrist of the
patient when the pulse is palpated. The practitioner often
prepares such a piece of silk himself because sometimes it was
not easy for poor families to get one.
2413
Pulse Diagnosis In Modern Times
In 1926, Yun Tie Jiao wrote the ‘Explanation of the Pulse’ (
Mai Xue
Fa
 
Wei). This book tries to integrate the traditional Chinese view
with a modern view of pulse diagnosis.
Since 1949, modern scientific methods and technology have
been employed for the study of the pulse. Some doctors have
researched the division of the pulse into three section and the
connection of the pulse with the channel system.
CHANNEL DIAGNOSIS
Channel diagnosis is based on the observation of changes
occurring on the skin overlying the channels. Since the Warring
States period, the term ‘channel’ referred to anything which is seen
on the skin, anywhere on the body. The changes observed pertain
to the Connecting channel portion of the Main channels as it is
only the Connecting channels that communicate with the skin
through the Superficial and Minute Connecting channels. For
example, visible subcutaneous veins and venules are a
manifestation of the Blood Connecting channels; although they are
venules from the Western point of view, they are part of the
channel system from the Chinese point of view.
The blood vessels (venules) visible on the surface of the skin are
always a reflection of the Connecting channels. When they become
visible, the blood vessels are an expression of the percolation of
the Blood Connecting channels towards the surface of the skin (the
Blood Connecting vessels at the deep level of the Connecting
channels).
Chapter 17
 
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ says: 
‘
The Main channels are in
the Interior, their branches and horizontal [or crosswise] forming
the Connecting channels: branching out from these are the Minute
Connecting. When these are Full with stagnant Blood they should
be drained with a bleeding needle; when they are deficient, they
should be tonified with herbs
 
.’
 
10
Chapter 10
 
of the same text says: 
‘
The Main channels are deep
and hidden between the muscles and cannot be seen; only the Spleen
channel can be seen as it emerges from above the internal malleolus
2414
and it has no place to hide. The Connecting channels are superficial
and can be seen
 
.’
 
11
 
The same chapter also says: 
‘
When the
Connecting channels are greenish-bluish it indicates Cold and pain;
when they are red it indicates Heat
 
’.
 
12
Apart from the blood vessels, the colour of the skin itself
reflects the condition of the Connecting channels: red indicates
Heat, green indicates pain, purple indicates Blood stasis, and
bluish indicates Blood stasis and Cold.
Channel diagnosis includes several methods of diagnosis as
follows:
 
• 
 
observation of the thenar eminence
• 
 
observation of the ear
• 
 
plucking of the vein in the inner leg
• 
 
observation of sublingual veins
• 
 
observation of the index finger in babies.
Observation Of The Thenar Eminence
The thenar eminence shows the state of the Stomach. 
Chapter 10
of the ‘Spiritual Axis’ relates the colour of the thenar eminence to
the state of the Stomach and says: 
‘
When the Stomach has Cold, the
thenar eminence is bluish; when the Stomach has Heat, the thenar
eminence is reddish; if it is suddenly black, it indicates chronic
Painful Obstruction Syndrome; if it is sometimes red, sometimes
dark and sometimes bluish it indicates alternation of Heat and
Cold; if it is bluish and short, it indicates deficiency of Qi.
 
’
 
13
Chapter 74
 
of the same text says: 
‘
When the thenar eminence has
bluish venules, it indicates Cold in the Stomach
 
.’
 
14
The chapter ‘Prescriptions for children, women and the elderly’
in the ‘Thousand Golden Ducats Prescriptions’ (
Qian Jin Yao Fang
 
)
by Sun Si Miao describes the use of the venules on the thenar
eminence to diagnose epilepsy or infantile convulsions. It says: 
‘
A
black colour of the channels in the thenar eminence is a sign of
epilepsy or infantile convulsions; a red colour Heat
 
’.
Observation Of The Ear
2415
This method is based on the observation of changes in the veins on
the back of the ear in small children. 
Chapter 74
 
of the ‘Spiritual
Axis’ says: 
‘
When an infant is sick, if the hair of the baby all stands
up, it indicates a very bad prognosis. If a bluish vessel appears on
the ear, it indicates abdominal pain due to spasm
 
.’
 
15
 
This method
was further developed in later times. For example, the chapter
‘Explanation of chicken pox and measles’ in the ‘Complete Works
of Jing Yue’ (
Jing Yue Quan Shu,
 
1624) says: 
‘
Chickenpox is mild if
red veins appear on both ears. It is severe if they look purple
 
’.
During the Qing dynasty, Xia Yu Zhu noticed that the colour of
the veins on the back of the ear could change according to weather,
and thought that it was not, therefore, enough to make a prognosis
based on the colour of these veins.
Plucking Of The Vein In The Inner Leg
The details for this method of diagnosis can be found in 
Chapter
20
 
of the ‘Simple Questions’. This diagnosis is carried out by
placing the fingers of the left hand gently on the skin 5 
cun
 
above
the medial malleolus while the right hand plucks the skin above
the medial malleolus gently. The results are interpreted as follows:
 
• 
 
if a vein appears gradually extending to 5 
cun
 
or more,
this is normal
• 
 
if a vein appears quickly and is quite thick, this
indicates a pathology
• 
 
if it appears slowly but does not reach 5 
cun
 
, or if it
does not appear at all in response to the plucking, the
prognosis is bad.
Observation Of Sublingual Veins
This diagnostic method was first recorded in the ‘Discussion on
the Origin of Symptoms in Illness’ (
Zhu Bing Yuan Hou Lun
 
, 
AD
610) by Chao Yuan Fang.
Observation of the sublingual veins is the subject of intense
research in modern China. It is believed that they may be used to
2416
determine the likelihood of future heart disease and hypertension.
Observation Of The Index Finger In Babies
This is a method of diagnosing diseases based on observation of
the veins on the palmar aspect of the index finger on infants. It has
a long history, probably starting in the Tang dynasty when it was
first mentioned by Wang Chao in ‘Verses on the Immortal’s Water
Mirror with Illustrations’ (
Xian Ren Shui Jing Tu Jue
 
), and was
widely used in clinical practice throughout China. It is still
regarded as being a significant method of diagnosis today.
Origin of observation of the index finger in babies
Some diagnostic methods have traditionally always been applied
specifically to infants; these include observation of veins on the
back of the ear, observation of the root of the nose and observation
of the index finger veins. These methods are generally used for
children under the age of 3 years.
It is not clear when this diagnostic technique started. A book
from 1750 ‘Complete Works of Paediatrics’ (
You You Ji Cheng
 
) by
Chen Fu Zheng dates this method back to the Song dynasty:
The diagnosis by the channels on the index finger was initiated
by Qian Zhong Yang in Song Dynasty. The finger was divided
into three Gates: the Gate of Wind, the Gate of Qi and the Gate
of Life. The verse recited that the condition was mild if the
channels reached the Gate of Wind, severe if it reached the Gate
of Qi and dangerous if it reached the Gate of Life.
Xu Shu Wei (Song dynasty) says in his ‘Effective Prescriptions
for Universal Relief’ (
Pu Ji Ben Shi Fang
 
):
In infants, it is difficult to palpate the pulse and some
practitioners refer to the colour in Hu Kou (the index finger)
and the temperature of the limbs. A purple colour indicates
Wind; a red colour indicates invasion of Cold; a blue colour
indicates infantile convulsions; a white colour indicates
malnutrition; a yellow colour indicates a disease of the Spleen.
2417
Observation of the index finger in the Song and Yuan
dynasties
During the Song and Yuan dynasties, the most detailed record
about the observation of the colour of the channels in the index
finger can be found in a book on paediatrics of the Song dynasty
entitled ‘A Book on Paediatrics’ (
You You Xin Shu
 
). Liu Fang
compiled the book together with Wang Li and Wang Shi. He says:
The proximal portion of the index finger is known as the Gate
of Wind, the middle one is the Gate of Qi and the distal part of
the finger is known as the Gate of Life. Some people emphasize
using the left hand in boys and the right hand in girls. I think
that it should be the same on boys and girls.
Liu Fang described eight common shapes of the veins: a shape
like the skeleton of the fish, a shape like a suspended needle, a
shape like the Chinese character for water, a sigmoid shape, an
annular shape, a shape like an earthworm, an irregular shape and
a shape like a fish-eye.
Wei Yi Lin described the clinical significance of the veins on the
index finger of babies in the book ‘Effective Formulae Handed
down for Generations’ (
Shi Yi De Xiao Fang
 
). He says:
Observation over the channels of the index finger should be
made on the left hand for boys and on the right hand for girls. If
the veins are within the Gate of Wind, it usually indicates
convulsion due to fright by birds or people. If it is red and
indistinct, it indicates fright by fire; if it is black, it indicates
fright by water or fighting; if it is bluish, it indicates fright by
thunder or animals. If there is a bluish curved line shown
slightly, it is a sight of acute infantile convulsions. If the line is
crooked, it is a sign of poor digestion. If the veins reach the
Gate of Qi and are purple, it indicates infantile malnutrition
resulting from infantile convulsions. If the veins are bluish, it
indicates infantile malnutrition affecting the Liver Channel. If
they are whitish in colour, it indicates affliction of the Lung
Channel. If they are black in colour, it indicates the disease is
2418
severe. If a bluish black line going through the three gates
appears in the Gate of Life and runs oblique towards the
fingernail, there is no hope for the patient.
Observation of the index finger in babies during the
Ming and Qing dynasties
During the Ming and Qing dynasties, observation of the veins on
the index finger was developed further. All pediatric books of this
period include a chapter on observation of the veins of the index
finger. The book ‘Complete Book on Experiences in Paediatrics’
(
Quan You Xin Jian I
 
, 1468) by Kou Ping contained detailed
descriptions of the channels in the face and the three gates on the
index finger. It included more than 40 pictures and the record of 13
shapes of the channels in the index finger.
Yu Tuan discusses diagnosis by the index finger in babies in his
book ‘Orthodox Medical Problems’ (
Yi Xue Zheng Chuan
 
). He
pointed out:
It is difficult to diagnose diseases of small children by
palpating the pulse at Cun Kou at the route of the Lung
Channel. For small children aged between 1 to 6 years old, the
veins in the three Gates of the index finger can be used to
diagnose diseases and determine their prognosis. Check the left
hand for boys and right hand for girls.
It contained 19 pictures and a record of 17 abnormal shapes of
the veins on the index finger.
The book ‘Explanation to Questions about Paediatrics’ (
You Ke
Shi Mi
 
, 1774) by Shen Jin Ao recorded 13 abnormal appearances of
the veins on the index finger, while the ‘Golden Mirror of
Medicine’ (
Yi Zong Jin
 
Jian, 1742) by Wu Qian recorded 20.
Observation of the index finger in babies in modern
times
Since 1949, diagnosis based on the appearance of veins on the
index finger in babies has been developed further. Now it is
verified by anatomy that the veins in the index finger are actually
2419
the palmar vein, which runs into the cephalic vein. Its location is
superficial so that it is easily observed.
Observation shows that the vein is clearly exposed on children
under 3 years old. However, some think that it can be used as a
reference for diagnosis for all children under school age. The rule
about observing the left hand for boys and left for girls is now
considered insignificant.
Research indicates that the three Gates are significant for the
understanding of diseases. Veins can appear longer when there is
an increase in venous pressure, the peripheral blood vessels are
dilated or there is malnutrition. This fits with the traditional view
that ‘a mild disease will manifest with the veins within the Gate of
Wind, severe diseases with the veins within the Gate of Qi, and
critical conditions with the veins reaching the Gate of Life’.
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
Warring States Period (475–221
BC
 
)
Several passages in the ‘Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine’ mention tongue diagnosis. For examples:
If the tongue is loose, there is drooling and the patient is
irritable, choose the Leg Lesser-Yin channel.
 
16
If the Qi of the Leg Terminal Yin [Liver] is exhausted the lips
turn blue and the tongue curls.
 
17
This passage shows that in the ‘Simple Questions’ and ‘Spiritual
Axis’, tongue diagnosis was based primarily on observation of the
tongue-body shape rather than tongue-body colour. Other tongue-
body shapes mentioned in these two texts are rolled, stiff,
withered and short.
The tongue coating is mentioned in a few passages. For example:
‘
When the Lungs are invaded by Heat … the body hair stands up,
the patient has aversion to cold, the tongue coating is yellow and
the body hot
 
.’
 
18
2420
Han Dynasty (206
BC–AD
 
220)
During this time the most important contribution to tongue
diagnosis is contained in the Zhang Zhong Jing’s classics
‘Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ (
Shang Han Lun
 
) and
‘Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet’ (
Jin Gui Yao
Lue Fang
 
). For example:
A yellow tongue coating and a feeling of fullness in the
intestines indicate excess Heat. If purging is applied and the
Heat cleared, the yellow coating disappears.
 
19
In Bright-Yang disorders with constipation, abdominal fullness
and vomiting, the tongue has a white coating.
 
20
If the patient has a feeling of fullness of the chest, dry lips and
the tongue body colour is bluish … it indicates Blood stasis.
 
21
Sui And Tang Dynasties (
AD
 
581–907)
The two most important works containing a discussion of tongue
diagnosis are the ‘Discussion on the Origin of Symptoms in
Illness’ (
Zhu Bing Yuan Hou Lun
 
, 610) by Chao Yuan Fang and the
‘Thousand Golden Ducats Prescriptions’ (
Qian Jin Yao Fang
 
, 652)
by Sun Si Miao. For example, the ‘Discussion on the Origin of
Symptoms in Illness’ says: 
‘
When the tongue has no coating,
attacking methods of treatment [e.g. purgation] cannot be used
 
.’
The ‘Thousand Golden Ducats Prescriptions’ says: 
‘
In Full patterns
of the Heart the tongue is cracked
 
’
 
.
Song, Jin And Yuan Dynasties (960–1368)
It was during this time that tongue diagnosis became a specialized
subject. Li Dong Yuan attached special important to dryness of the
tongue in his ‘Discussion on Stomach and Spleen’ (
Pi Wei Lun
 
).
A doctor known only by his surname, Ao, wrote the first book
devoted entirely to tongue diagnosis towards the beginning of the
Yuan dynasty. Later in the Yuan dynasty, Du Qing Bi revised this
book and published a revised edition under the title ‘Ao’s Record
2421
of the Golden Mirror of Cold-induced Diseases’. The tongue-body
colours mentioned are Pale, Red and Blue; tongue shapes
mentioned are Flabby, Swollen and Deviated, among others.
Ming And Qing Dynasties (1368–1911)
During the Ming dynasty several books on tongue diagnosis were
published, all modelled on ‘Ao’s Record of the Golden Mirror of
Cold-induced Diseases’ mentioned above. The most prominent of
these was Shen Dou Yuan’s ‘Essential Methods of Observation of
the Tongue in Cold-induced Diseases’, which describes 135 types
of tongue.
Several texts on tongue diagnosis were written during the Qing
dynasty. Zhang Dan Xian wrote the ‘Mirror of the Tongue in Cold-
induced Diseases’ containing 120 illustrations. Fu Song Yuan wrote
‘A Collection of Tongues and Coatings’, which departs from the
tradition of seeing tongue diagnosis only in the context of Cold-
induced diseases.
In 1906, Liang Te Yan wrote the ‘Differentiation of Syndromes by
Examination of the Tongue’, which illustrates and describes 148
types of tongues.
Modern Times
Many new books on tongue diagnosis have been published since
the establishment of the People’s Republic of China in 1949.
Chinese medical journals regularly report the results of a
considerable amount of research carried out on tongue diagnosis.
A particular aspect of tongue diagnosis, the sublingual veins, is the
subject of considerable research which investigates the use of the
sublingual veins as a diagnostic sign in heart disease.
The following are examples of articles on tongue diagnosis
which have appeared in the Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi
Za Zhi
 
):
 
• 
 
‘Clinical significance of Dark-Red tongue’
 
22
• 
 
‘Tongue and patterns in hepatitis B’
 
23
• 
 
‘Tongue appearance in bone fractures’
 
24
• 
 
‘Tongue appearance in burns septicaemia’
 
25
2422
• 
 
‘Tongue appearance in schizophrenia’
 
26
• 
 
‘Tongue appearance before and after operations’
 
27
• 
 
‘Tongue changes after burns’
 
28
• 
 
‘Tongue changes in cancer, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy’
 
29
• 
 
‘Tongue changes in diabetes’
 
30
• 
 
‘Tongue coating after surgery for stomach cancer’
 
31
• 
 
‘Tongue coating in lung cancer’
 
32
• 
 
‘Tongue diagnosis and identification of patterns’
 
33
• 
 
‘Tongue diagnosis and enteroscopy’
 
34
• 
 
‘Tongue diagnosis and gastroscopy’
 
35
• 
 
‘Sublingual veins in blood stasis’
 
36
NOTES
1. 
Unless otherwise stated, all texts referred to and
quotations in this appendix are cited in Deng Tie Tao 1988
Practical Chinese Medicine Diagnosis 
Shi Yong Zhong Yi
Zhen Duan Xue
 
, Shanghai Publishing House, Shanghai
2. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979:102 First
published c. 100
BC
3. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 130.
4. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 139.
5. 
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine –
Simple Questions (
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
).
People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing, 1979; 112.
6. 
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A
Revised Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing
Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House: Beijing,
1979:1–2 First published c. 
AD
 
100
2423
7. 
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A Revised
Explanation of the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing Jiao Shi
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1979; 2.
8. 
Simple Questions, pp. 4–5.
9. 
Classic of Difficulties, p. 46
10. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:50 
First published c. 100
BC
11. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 37.
12. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 37.
13. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981:120. [Para 37].
14. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 133.
15. 
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House: Beijing, 1981; 133.
16. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 129, para 30
17. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 30
18. 
Spiritual Axis, p. 186
19. 
Ren, He. A New Explanation of the Synopsis of
Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet (
Jin Gui Yao Lue Xin
Jie
 
 
). Zhejiang Science Publishing House: Zhejiang,
1981:65 The Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden
Cabinet was written by Zhang Zhong Jing c. 
AD
 
200
20. 
Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of
Traditional Chinese Medicine. An Explanation of the
Discussion of Cold-Induced Diseases (
Shang Han Lun Jiao
Shi
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House,
1980; 948.
21. 
Synopsis of Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet, p. 138
22. 
Sheng, Lan Xin, et al. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong
Yi Za Zhi
 
 
) 1992;(5):46. [1992].
23. 
Cheng, Chen Han, Da, Xu Wen. Journal of Chinese
Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
) 1988;(4):53. [1988].
24. 
Fractures Group of Chinese Medicine Hospital of Dang Shu
City (Jiangsu Province). Journal of Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
) 1986;(11):41.
2424
25. 
Xia, Kong Zhao. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za
Zhi
 
) 1980;(8):26.
26. 
Ren, Chen Wei. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za
Zhi
 
) 1995;(12):741.
27. 
Hua, Qin Ji. Journal of the Nanjing College of Traditional
Chinese Medicine 1987;(2):17. [1987].
28. 
Xun, Han Ji. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
)
1988;(9):45. [1988].
29. 
Juan, Li Su. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
)
1999;(10):636. [1999].
30. 
Shan, Guo Sai. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za
Zhi
 
) 1989;(2):33. [1989].
31. 
Xiang, Fang Dong. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi
Za Zhi
 
) 1999;(7):433. [1999].
32. 
Ye, Xu Zhen. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
)
1993;(6):334. [1993].
33. 
Qin, Cai Yu. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
 
)
1993;(12):716. [1993].
34. 
Zheng, Dai Wei. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za
Zhi
 
) 1994;(1):43.
35. 
Liang, Dai Hao. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za
Zhi
 
) 1984;(10):74. [1984].
36. 
Ying, Jin Shi. Journal of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Za Zhi
) 1992;(3):42. [1992].
2425
Glossary of Chinese
terms
GENERAL
2426
2427
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
2428
2429
2430
2431
2432
2433
DISEASE SYMPTOMS
2434
2435
2436
VITAL SUBSTANCES
2437
2438
EMOTIONS
CHANNELS AND POINTS
2439
2440
PULSE POSITIONS
2441
PULSE QUALITIES
2442
2443
METHODS OF TREATMENT
2444
2445
2446
PATHOGENIC FACTORS
2447
2448
Bibliography
The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine – Simple Questions
(
Huang Di Nei Jing Su Wen
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House,
Beijing, 1979. First published c. 100
BC
 
.
Spiritual Axis (
Ling Shu Jing
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House,
Beijing, 1981. first published c. 100
BC
 
.
Beijing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Tongue Diagnosis in
Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi She Zhen
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health
Publishing House, 1980.
Yuan, Chen Jia Eight Secret Books on Gynaecology (
Fu Ke Mi Shu Ba Zhong
 
). Ancient Chinese Medicine Texts Publishing House, Beijing,
1988. Chen’s book, written during the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), was
entitled ‘Secret Gynaecological Prescriptions’ (
Fu Ke Mi Fang
 
 
).
Bang, Chen You. Chinese Acupuncture Therapy (
Zhong Guo Zhen Jiu Zhi
Liao Xue
 
 
). Beijing: China Science Publishing House, 1990.
Shu, Cheng Bao. An Annotated Translation of the Study of the Pulse from
Pin Hu Lake (
Pin Hu Mai Xue Yi Zhu
 
 
). Beijing: Ancient Chinese
Medical Texts Publishing House, 1988. [‘The Study of the Pulse from Pin
Hu Lake’ was first published in 1564. ].
En, Cheng Shao. Diagnosis, Patterns and Treatment in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zheng Hou Zhen Duan Zhi Liao Xue
 
 
). Beijing:
Beijing Science Publishing House, 1994.
Nong, Cheng Xin. Chinese Acupuncture and Moxibustion (Zhong Guo
Zhen Jiu Xue 
 
). Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1987.
Chinese Medicine Research Institute and Guangzhou College of Chinese
Medicine. Concise Dictionary of Chinese Medicine (
Jian Ming Zhong Yi Ci
Dian
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1980.
Chinese Medicine Research Institute and Guangzhou College of Chinese
Medicine. Great Dictionary of Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Da Ci Dian
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing Company, 1981.
Yu, Cong Chun. Gynaecology in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Fu Ke Xue
 
). Beijing: Ancient Chinese Medicine Texts Publishing House,
1989.
Tao, Deng Tie. Practical Chinese Medicine Diagnosis (
Shi Yong Zhong Yi
Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing
House, 1988.
2449
Fuzhou City People’s Hospital A Revised Explanation of the Pulse Classic
(
Mai Jing Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House, Beijing, 1988.
The ‘Pulse Classic’ was written by Wang Shu He and was first published
in 
AD
 
280.
Di, Gu Yi. Illustrated Collection of Diagnostic Methods in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zhen Fa Tu Pu
 
 
). Shanghai: Publishing House of the
Shanghai College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 1986.
Guang Dong College of Chinese Medicine. Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science
Publishing House, 1979.
Qiu, Guo Zhen. Chinese Medicine Diagnosis (
Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
). Changsha: Hunan Science Publishing House, 1985.
Ren, He. A New Explanation of the Synopsis of Prescriptions from the
Golden Cabinet (
Jin Gui Yao Lue Xin Jie
 
 
). Zhejiang: Zhejiang
Science Publishing House, 1981.
Heilongjiang Province National Medical Research Group. An Explanation of
the Great Compendium of Acupuncture (
Zhen Jiu Da Cheng Jiao Shi
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1984. [The ‘Great
Compendium of Acupuncture’ itself was published in 1601. ].
Lin, Huang Shi. Research in Chinese Medicine Pulse Diagnosis (
Zhong Yi
Mai Xiang Yan Jiu
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1989.
Yuan, Li Dong. Discussion on Stomach and Spleen (
Pi Wei Lun
 
 
).
Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1976. [First published in 1246.
].
Wen, Li Jing. Illustrated Collection of Tongue Images in Frequently-Seen
Diseases of the Digestive System (
Chang Jian Xiao Hua Xi Ji Bing She
Xiang Tu Pu
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House,
1994.
Han, Lin Zhi. The Essential Four Diagnostic Examinations (
Si Zhen Jue Wei
 
). Beijing: Chinese Bookshop Publishing House, 1987. [First
published in 1723. ].
Xing, Ling Yao. Practical Dictionary of Words and Phrases from the Nei Jing
(
Shi Yong Nei Jing Ci Ju Ci Dian
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai
Chinese Pharmacology University Publishing House, 1994.
Jun, Liu Guan. Pulse Diagnosis (
Mai Zhen
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science
Publishing House, 1981.
Ming, Lu De. Illustrated Collection of Diagnosis and Treatment of External
Diseases in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Wai Ke Zhen Liao Tu Pu
 
). Shanghai: Publishing House of the Shanghai College of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, 1993.
2450
Xue, Ma Zhong. Great Treatise of Chinese Diagnostic Methods (
Zhong Guo
Yi Xue Zhen Fa Da Quan
 
 
). Shandong: Shandong Science
Publishing House, 1989.
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. A Study of Warm Diseases
(
Wen Bing Xue
 
 
). Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House,
1978.
Nanjing College of Traditional Chinese Medicine A Revised Explanation of
the Classic of Difficulties (
Nan Jing Jiao Shi
 
 
). People’s Health
Publishing House, Beijing, 1979. First published c. 
AD
 
100.
Xue, Pei Zheng A Commentary on the Discussion of Blood Syndromes (
Xue
Zheng Lun Ping Shi
 
 
). People’s Health Publishing House, Beijing,
1980. The Discussion on Blood Syndromes (
Xue Zheng Lun
 
 
) by Tang
Zong Hai was originally published in 1885.
Shang Han Lun Research Group of the Nanjing College of Traditional
Chinese Medicine An Explanation of the Discussion of Cold-induced
Diseases (
Shang Han Lun Jiao Shi
 
 
). Shanghai Science Publishing
House, Shanghai, 1980. ‘The Discussion of Cold-induced Diseases’ was
written by Zhang Zhong Jing in c. 220
BC
 
.
Wang, Ke Qin. Theory of the Mind in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Shen
Zhu Xue Shuo
 
 
). Ancient Chinese Medical Texts Publishing
House, 1988.
Wang, Luo Zhen A Compilation of the Study of the Eight Extraordinary
Vessels (
Qi Jing Ba Mai Kao Jiao Zhu
 
 
). Shanghai Science
Publishing House, Shanghai, 1985. 
The ‘Study of the Eight Extraordinary
Vessels’ (
Qi Jing Ba Mai Kao
 
) by Li Shi Zhen was published in 1578.
Wang, Xue Tai. Great Treatise of Chinese Acupuncture (
Zhong Guo Zhen Jiu
Da Quan
 
 
). Henan: Henan Science and Technology Publishing
House, 1995.
Wu, Qian. Golden Mirror of Medicine (
Yi Zong Jin Jian
 
 
); Vol. 2.
People’s Health Publishing House, Beijing, 1977. [First published in 1742.
].
Yang, Ji Zhou. Great Compendium of Acupuncture (
Zhen Jiu Da Cheng
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1980. [First published
in 1601].
San, Yang Jia. Great Dictionary of Chinese Acupuncture (
Zhong Guo Zhen
Jiu Da Ci Dian
 
 
). Beijing: Beijing Physical Training College
Publishing House, 1988.
Zhai, Ming Yi. Clinical Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Lin Chuang Ji Chu
 
). Henan: Henan Publishing House, 1979; 132.
Yu, Zhang Bo. Chinese Internal Medicine (
Zhong Yi Nei Ke Xue
 
 
).
Shanghai: Shanghai Science Publishing House, 1986.
2451
Zhang, Jie Bin. Classic of Categories (
Lei Jing
 
 
). Beijing: People’s Health
Publishing House, 1982; 99. [First published in 1624. ].
Zhang Jie Bin (also called Zhang Jing Yue) 1986 Complete Works of Jing Yue
(
Jing Yue Quan Shu
 
 
), Shanghai Science Publishing House,
Shanghai. First published in 1624.
Zhang, Shu Sheng. Great Treatise of Diagnosis by Observation in Chinese
Medicine (
Zhong Hua Yi Xue Wang Zhen Da Quan
 
 
). Taiyuan:
Shanxi Science Publishing House, 1995.
Kai Zhang Yuan, ed. Medical Collection of Four Families from Meng He
(
Meng He Si Jia Yi Ji
 
 
). Nanjing: Jiangsu Science Publishing
House, 1985.
Duo, Zhao Jin. Identification of Patterns and Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zheng Zhuang Jian Bie Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing House, 1985.
Duo, Zhao Jin. Differential Diagnosis and Patterns in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zheng Hou Jian Bie Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing House, 1991.
Ze, Zhao Jin. Differential Diagnosis and Patterns in Chinese Medicine
(
Zhong Yi Zheng Hou Jian Bie Zhen Duan Xue
 
 
). Beijing:
People’s Health Publishing House, 1991.
Shi, Zhu Qi. Discussion on Exhaustion (
Xu Lao Lun
 
 
). Beijing: People
Health Publishing House, 1988; 19. [First published c. 1520].
Feng, Zhu Wen. Diagnosis in Chinese Medicine (
Zhong Yi Zhen Duan Xue
 
). Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House, 1999.
2452
Chinese chronology
Xia: 21st to 16th century 
BC
Shang: 16th to 11th century 
BC
Zhou: 11th century to 771
BC
Spring and Autumn period: 770–476
BC
Warring States period: 475–221
BC
Qin: 221–207
BC
Han: 206
BC–AD
 
220
Three Kingdoms period: 
AD
 
220–280
Jin: 265–420
Northern and Southern dynasties: 420–581
Sui: 581–618
Tang: 618–907
Five dynasties: 907–960
Song: 960–1279
Liao: 906–1125
Jin: 1115–1234
Yuan: 1271–1368
Ming: 1368–1644
Qing: 1644–1911
Republic of China: 1912–1949
People’s Republic of China: 1949–
2453
INDEX
Note:
Page numbers in 
italics
 
denote figures; 
bold
 
denotes main entries; 
plate
 
denotes colour
photographs
A
abdomen
abnormal feelings in, 
741-742
areas influenced by organs, 
510
 
, 
510
areas of, 
145
 
, 
513
 
, 
513-516
borborygmi, 
742-743
central-lower, 
516
channels influencing, 
145
 
See also
 
specific channels
cold feeling in, 
741-742
distension (bloating) 
See
 
distension (bloating)
energy rising feeling in, 
742
epigastrium 
See
 
epigastrium
flatulence, 
273
 
, 
743
fullness 
See
 
fullness
hypochondrium 
See
 
hypochondrium
interrogation, 
326-335
kidneys reflection, 
146
large, 
146
 
, 
745
2454
lateral-lower, areas and palpation, 
515-516
 
, 
516
lumps/masses, 
146-147
 
, 
511-512
 
, 
856-857
contracted ears and, 
584
gynaecological symptoms, 
856-857
symptoms and signs, 
744-745
types, 
147
 
, 
512
observation, 
143-147
oedema, 
146
 
, 
745
pain 
See
 
abdominal pain
palpation, 
510-512
 
, 
513-516
patterns, 
334
sagging lower, 
146
 
, 
745
size, 
146
 
, 
745
skin signs, 
147
distended veins, 
147
 
, 
743
lines, 
147
 
, 
743
maculae, 
147
 
, 
743-744
stomach and spleen reflection, 
146
symptoms and signs, 
326-327
 
, 
735-745
temperature, 
510-511
tenderness, 
511
 
, 
511
texture, 
511
 
, 
511
thin, 
146
 
, 
745
umbilical area 
See
 
umbilicus
xyphoid process 
See
 
xyphoid process
abdominal pain
after childbirth, 
844
2455
case histories
central–lower abdominal area, 
332-333
constipation, 
273
epigastric pain, 
330
hypochondrial pain, 
331
 
, 
332
tongue/pulse diagnosis, 
244
diagnosis, 
327
evacuation related, 
273-274
fullness 
See
 
fullness
location, 
327-335
 
, 
328
 
, 
334
area under xyphoid process, 
328-329
 
, 
329
 
, 
736-737
 
See also
 
xyphoid
process
central–lower abdominal area, 
332-333
 
, 
739-740
epigastrium 
See
 
epigastrium
hypochondrium 
See
 
hypochondrial pain
lateral lower abdominal area, 
740
left-lateral lower abdominal area, 
334-335
right-lateral lower abdominal area, 
333
 
, 
333-334
umbilical area, 
332
 
, 
738-739
 
See also
 
umbilicus
menstrual pain, 
401-404
oppression, 
735
patterns, 
334
pregnancy, 
838
stagnant Cold in Uterus, 
1002
stuffiness, 
327
 
, 
736
abortion, 
408
 
See also
 
miscarriage
Accumulation Disorder, 
868-869
breath odour, 
550
 
, 
550
2456
creases on index finger, 
195
 
, 
196
 
, 
197
crying in babies, 
544
with Spleen deficiency, hot palms and soles, 
866
temple palpation in babies, 
519
ACE inhibitors, effect on pulse, 
508
aches
back 
See
 
backache
earache, 
357
 
, 
357
 
, 
413
 
, 
582
head 
See
 
headache
limbs, 
671
nose, 
595
shoulder, 
656
teeth, 
306-307
 
, 
307
 
, 
615
whole body, 
317-318
 
, 
318
 
, 
709-710
 
, 
833
acne, 
71
inflammatory, 
Plate 21.24
occurrence, 
182
papular-pustular, 
plate 21.21
pathology and diagnosis
Chinese, 
183
 
, 
183
Western, 
182-183
pustular, 
plate 21.22
scarring, 
plate 21.23
symptoms and signs, 
569
 
, 
783-784
acne rosacea, 
plate 21.55
acupuncture
accumulation of Blood, 
966
Attack of Wind, 
965
2457
Bladder deficient and Cold, 
926
Blood rebelling upwards after childbirth, 
1003
Cold transformation, 
968
Dampness and Phlegm in Uterus, 
1002
Directing and Penetrating Vessels deficient and Cold, 
999
Directing and Penetrating Vessels empty, 
999
Directing and Penetrating Vessels unstable, 
999
fetus Heat, 
1003
Full-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1000
Heart-Qi and Heart-Yin deficiency, 
881
Heart-Yang collapse, 
880
Heat transformation, 
968
Heat victorious agitates Blood, 
957
Heat victorious stirring Wind, 
957
Kidney- and Liver Yin deficiency with Empty Heat, 
909
Kidney and Heart not harmonized (Kidney- and Heart-Yin
deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat), 
909
Kidney-Yang (predominant) and Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
907
Kidney-Yang and Kidney-Yin deficiency (predominant), 
907
Kidney-Yang deficiency, Water overflowing, 
906
Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
906
Kidney-Yin deficiency, Empty Heat blazing, 
907
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Phlegm, 
907
Liver-Blood deficiency generating Wind, 
895
Liver-Blood stasis, 
893
Liver-Fire Blazing Upwards, 
893
Liver-Fire generating Wind, 
894
2458
Liver-Heat stirs Wind, 
970
Liver-Wind harbouring Phlegm, 
895
Liver-Yang rising, 
892
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Yin deficiency, 
894
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind, 
894
Lung
invasion by Wind-Cold, 
901
invasion by Wind-Dryness, 
901
invasion by Wind-Heat, 
901
Lung-Heat, 
902
 
, 
955
Lung-Qi collapse, 
903
Lung-Qi deficiency, 
899
Lung-Qi deficiency with Phlegm, 
899-900
Lung-Qi stagnation, 
903
Lung-Yang deficiency, 
900
Lung-Yin deficiency, 
900
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
900
Obstruction of Spleen by Dampness with stagnation of Liver-Qi,
889
Phlegm misting Mind, 
882
Phlegm obstructing Middle Burner, 
888
Rebellious Liver Qi, 
892
Small Intestine deficient and Cold, 
912
Small Intestine Qi tied, 
912
Spleen- and Liver-Blood deficiency, 
889
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency, 
889
Spleen-Blood deficiency, 
886
2459
Spleen Damp-Heat, 
970
stagnant Cold in Uterus, 
1002
Stomach Blood stasis, 
915
Stomach-Qi rebelling upwards, 
916
Uterus deficient and Cold, 
1002
Water Overflowing to Heart, 
883
Wind-Cold invasion (Cold prevalent), 
965
Yang Heel Vessel 
(Yang Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Heel Vessel 
(Yin Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Linking Vessel 
(Yin Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
 
see also individual points
acupuncture points
back transporting 
(Bei Shu)
 
points, 
522
front collecting 
(Mu)
 
points, 
521-522
palpation, 
520-522
source 
(Yuan)
 
points, 
522
 
see also individual points
adenoids, swollen, 
111
adolescence, Five Stages of Life, 
417
adverse drug reactions, 
429
agalactia, 
408
 
, 
408
age/aging
Five Stages of Life, 
417-418
pulse, 
450
 
, 
470
 
See also
 
elderly
Ah Shi points, 
520
 
, 
527-528
Al Fu Nuan Gong Wan
 
, 
1025
alae nasi, flapping, 
90
 
, 
598
alcoholism, hand tremor, 
130
 
, 
156
allergic rhinitis, 
304
 
, 
305
 
, 
546
 
, 
1017
 
, 
1019
alopecia, 
72
 
, 
72
 
, 
566
 
See also
 
hair loss
amenorrhoea, 
400
 
, 
401
 
, 
829
 
, 
845
An Shen Ding Zhi Wan
 
, 
1025
2460
anger, 
385-386
 
, 
420-423
 
, 
423
propensity to, 
791
pulse indication, 
452
sighing, 
545
anorexia, 
319
antibiotics
residual pathogenic factors, 
974
tongue, 
204
 
, 
204
antidepressants, effect on pulse, 
507-508
anus
fissure, 
762
fistula, 
762
haemorrhoids, 
761-762
itching, 
761
prolapse, 
762
symptoms and signs, 
761-763
ulcers, 
763
anxiety, 
384-385
patterns, 
384
 
, 
385
in pregnancy, 
840
symptoms and signs, 
792-793
 
, 
799-800
 
See also
 
fear;
 
mental-
emotional symptoms;
 
worry
apical pulse, 
512
 
, 
512
appetite, 
264-265
aversion to food, 
264
 
, 
721
excessive hunger, 
264
 
, 
720
hunger but no desire to eat, 
265
 
, 
721
poor, 
719-720
 
See also
 
hunger
armpits 
See
 
axillae
2461
arms
symptoms/signs, 
679-692
tremor, 
341
 
See also
 
limbs
arthritis, rheumatoid, 
138
asthma
hand lines, 
134
 
, 
134
mouth open, 
97
atopic eczema 
See
 
eczema
atrial fibrillation, pulse indication, 
460
atrophy
dorsum of hands, 
130
 
, 
685-686
legs, 
160
 
, 
694-695
limbs, 
153-154
 
, 
154
 
, 
338
 
, 
338
 
, 
674-675
muscles along spine, 
116
 
, 
705
thenar eminence of hands, 
130
 
, 
685
Attack of Cold, 
945
 
, 
945
 
, 
965
Attack of Cold/Wind differentiation, 
369-370
 
, 
370
 
, 
370
 
, 
966
Attack of Wind, 
945
 
, 
945
 
, 
965
Auspitz’s sign, 
184
axillae
rash, 
785
sweating in, 
779
2462
B
Ba Xian Chang Shou Wan
 
, 
1025
Ba Zhen Tang
 
, 
1026
Ba Zheng San
 
, 
1026
babies
convulsions, 
155
crying, 
413
 
, 
544
 
, 
868
effect of childbirth, 
412
feeding, 
412
fontanelles
late closure in babies, 
70
 
, 
872
raised, 
871-872
sunken, 
871
index finger observation, 
1057
 
See also
 
index finger creases
(children)
period in womb, 
411
 
, 
412
prenatal shock, 
411-412
sleeping problems, 
413
temple palpation, 
518-519
 
, 
519
weaning, 
412
 
See also
 
children
back
aches 
See
 
backache
boils on, 
119
 
, 
706
buttocks 
See
 
buttocks
channels influencing, 
115
 
, 
115
 
, 
116
lower
dryness and redness, 
119
 
, 
706
2463
feeling of cold and heaviness, 
704
rigidity, 
116
 
, 
705
skin marks, 
119
 
, 
706
stiffness, 
705
symptoms and signs, 
703-715
vesicles on, 
119
 
, 
706
weakness with knee weakness, 
704-705
yellow colour, 
119
 
, 
706
observation, 
115-120
pustules on, 
118
 
, 
118-119
sciatica, 
704
skin signs, 
118-119
 
, 
706-707
spots on, 
118
 
, 
118-119
 
, 
706
stiffness like tight belt, 
657
upper
carbuncles, 
788
cold, 
656
hot, 
656
 
See also
 
spine
backache
lower, 
318
 
, 
318
 
, 
703-704
upper, 
656
bad breath (halitosis), 
111
 
, 
729
Bai He Gu Jin Tang
 
, 
1026
Bai Hu Tang
 
, 
1026
Bai Tou Weng Tang
 
, 
1026
Ban
 
, 
176
 
, 
177
Ban Xia Hou Po Tang
 
, 
1026
Ban Xia Tang
 
, 
1026
Bao He Wan
 
, 
1026
2464
Bao Jin Jian
 
, 
1026-1027
Bao Yuan Tang
 
, 
1027
Bei Mu Gua Lou San
 
, 
1027
belching
diagnosis by sound, 
546
 
, 
546
patterns, 
266
symptoms and signs, 
717-718
Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis), 
60-61
 
, 
573
 
, 
plate 4.1
beta blockers, effect on pulse, 
508
Big Head Warm Disease, 
564
Big pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
birth 
See
 
childbirth
bitter taste, 
726-727
 
See also
 
taste
BL-23 Shenshu, 
119
 
, 
706
BL-40 Weizhong, 
533
 
, 
533
Bladder, 
925-926
channels, 
995
injury during childbirth, 
845
invasion of external Dampness, 
949-950
urinary difficulty, 
845
Bladder channel, 
995
abdomen, 
145
back, 
115
 
, 
115
 
, 
116
ears relationship, 
105
 
, 
106
eyes relationship, 
78
neck, 
109
 
, 
109
palpation, 
533
 
, 
533
blood vessel, 
533
skin, 
533
Bladder deficient and Cold, 
926
2465
bleeding
ears, 
583
eyes, between iris and pupil, 
649
gums, 
101
 
, 
307
 
, 
307
 
, 
619
menstrual 
See
 
menstrual bleeding
vaginal 
See
 
vaginal bleeding
 
Blood loss
blepharoconjunctivitis, 
643-644
blindness, sudden, 
630-631
bloating (distension) 
See
 
distension (bloating)
blocked nose, 
304
 
, 
304
 
, 
591-592
 
, 
1017
 
See also
 
rhinitis
Blood
accumulation of, 
966
 
See also
 
Blood stasis
Empty-Blood, 
990
Heat victorious agitates Blood, 
957
levels, 
957
Latent Heat, 
960
oedema, 
179
pattern identification, 
930-932
pulse diagnosis, 
434
 
, 
454
 
, 
463
 
, 
497
rebelling upwards after childbirth, 
1003
stasis 
See
 
Blood stasis
in urine, 
839
 
see also entries beginning Blood (below); individual
organs
Blood and Qi deficient, clinical manifestations, 
932-933
Blood and Yin deficiency with Empty-Wind, convulsions after childbirth, 
848
Blood-Cold, clinical manifestations, 
931
Blood collapse, 
931-932
clinical manifestations, 
931-932
Blood deficiency, 
930
abnormal lip colour in pregnancy, 
624
2466
amenorrhoea, 
829
after miscarriage, 
845
body aches, 
709
during menstruation, 
833
breast distension, 
849
breast milk, 
847
breech presentation, 
842
case histories, 
1015
chronic fever, 
375
 
, 
815
clinical manifestations, 
930
cold hands and feet, 
672
coldness, 
364
complexion colours, sallow white, 
51
constipation, 
749
dizziness
during menstruation, 
835
in pregnancy, 
840
dry, cracked and peeling palms, 
684-685
eclampsia, 
841
with Empty-Heat, 
302
 
, 
376
Five-Palm Heat, 
817
genital eczema (female), 
858
habitual miscarriage, 
842
headache, 
290
 
, 
561-562
hot palms and soles, 
866
infertility (female), 
855
insomnia, 
348
 
, 
807
2467
itching, 
713
late (long cycle) periods, 
827
lines on the face, 
574
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency, 
898
lochia, 
844
milky nipple discharge, 
851
miscarriage, 
841
numbness of face, 
572
oedema after childbirth, 
846
pain in hands, 
682
pale eye corners, 
636
pale eyelids, 
638
pale gums, 
620
pale helix, 
585
pale menstrual blood, 
825
post-chemotherapy fever, 
817
Qi deficiency and 
See
 
Qi and Blood deficiency
sallow complexion, 
578
scanty periods, 
828
severe, abnormal lip colour in pregnancy, 
624
skin eruptions during menstruation, 
834
slow fetal growth, 
842
small breasts, 
852
Spleen Qi and Spleen-Blood deficiency, 
804
tongue diagnosis, 
205
 
, 
228
watery menstrual blood, 
826
weight loss, 
319
2468
white/pale complexion, 
575
Blood deficiency and Intestines Dryness, anal fissure, 
762
Blood deficiency generating Empty-Wind, anal itching, 
761
Blood deficiency in Penetrating Vessel, restless legs, 
700
Blood deficiency with Cold in Uterus, purple menstrual blood, 
826
Blood deficiency with Dryness
eczema, 
783
genital eczema (women), 
858
small breasts, 
852
warts, 
787
with Wind in the skin, psoriasis, 
783
Blood deficiency with Empty-Heat, red complexion, 
577
Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind
quivering eyeball, 
644
trembling lips, 
623
Blood deficiency with internal Wind
flapping eyelids, 
639
itching ears, 
582
Blood deficiency with Wind
dry, cracked and peeling palms, 
685
skin, itching hands, 
683
Blood-Dryness, 
931
clinical manifestations, 
931
Blood-Heat
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
931
dark philtrum, 
626
distended abdominal veins, 
743
early (short cycle) periods, 
827
fever during menstruation, 
833
2469
habitual miscarriage, 
842
heavy periods, 
827-828
infertility (female), 
855
itching, 
713
lochia, 
844
maculae on abdomen, 
743
macular eruptions, 
573
malignant melanoma, 
788
menstrual clots, 
826
miscarriage, 
841
naevi (moles), 
787
pattern identification, 
931
post-chemotherapy fever, 
817
psoriasis, 
783
red philtrum, 
626
rosacea, 
785
urticaria, 
785
vaginal bleeding, 
838
warts, 
787
Blood-Heat from Liver-Fire
alopecia, 
566
fainting, 
560
hair falling out, 
566
Blood-Heat in Heart, 
931
Blood-Heat in Liver, 
931
Blood-Heat in Lungs, papules on nose, 
599
Blood-Heat in Stomach, 
931
Blood-Heat with Damp-Heat, malignant melanoma, 
788
Blood-Heat with Wind and Dryness, psoriasis, 
783
2470
Blood levels, Latent Heat, 
960
Blood loss
clinical manifestations, 
931
dry and brittle hair, 
566
Blood stagnation
generating Wind 
See
 
Wind
tongue, 
231
Blood stasis, 
930
abdomen, 
326
abdominal masses, 
856
acne, 
569
in back, lower backache, 
704
blood vessels distended on ear, 
586
body aches, 
709
during menstruation, 
833
chronic, numbness of the tongue, 
614
chronic and severe, dry skin, 
782
chronic fever, 
375
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
930
collapse after childbirth, 
847-848
contraction
of fingers, 
686
of limbs, 
677
crying out, 
822
Damp-Heat with 
See
 
Damp-Heat
dark helix, 
585
dark nails, 
692
digestive symptoms, 
262
2471
dizziness after childbirth, 
846
dry and cracked lips, 
623
dry nostrils, 
594
epigastric lumps, 
744
excessive pubic hair, 
860
facial pain, 
571
fever in cancer, 
816
flattening of lumbar spine, 
708
frozen shoulder, 
656
habitual miscarriage, 
842
in head, hot and painful eyes, 
632
headache, 
290
 
, 
561
during menstruation, 
832
helix dry and contracted, 
584
herpes zoster, 
786
hyperactivity, 
805
infertility (female), 
856
in Intestines, blood in stools, 
751
jaundice, 
714
knotted in the Interior, abdominal masses (gynaecological
symptom), 
856-857
list of spine, 
708
lochia, 
844
maculae on abdomen, 
744
malignant melanoma, 
788
menopausal syndrome, 
856
mid-cycle menstrual bleeding, 
830
2472
naevi (moles), 
788
with oedema, protruding umbilicus, 
147
oedema after childbirth, 
846
pain in ribs, 
324
post-chemotherapy fever, 
817
psoriasis, 
783
purple lips, 
621
purple palate, 
625
purple tongue, 
212
 
, 
213
 
, 
213
rigidity of lower back, 
705
rosacea, 
785
sallow complexion, 
578
severe
contracted ears with abdominal masses, 
584
dark complexion, 
578
in skin, urticaria, 
784
stiff philtrum, 
625
Stomach, 
915
swollen fingers, 
686
tidal fever, 
816
tongue diagnosis, 
210
Toxic Heat with 
See
 
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis
warts, 
787
yellow complexion, 
576-577
yellow sclera, 
635
 
see also entries beginning Blood stasis (below)
Blood stasis from Cold
abnormal lip colour in pregnancy, 
624
2473
bluish-greenish helix, 
585
dark helix, 
585
lines on abdomen, 
743
purple complexion, 
578
Blood stasis from Heat
bluish-greenish helix, 
585
purple complexion, 
578
yellow helix, 
585
Blood stasis from Qi deficiency, distension feeling in limbs, 
674
Blood stasis in Bladder
abdominal pain - central, lower, 
739
urination painful, 
755
Blood stasis in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1000
Blood stasis in Liver and Spleen, distended abdominal veins, 
743
Blood stasis in Liver channel
Peyronie’s disease, 
772
vulvar sores, 
858
Blood stasis in Lower Burner
blood in sperm, 
768
inability to ejaculate, 
768
pain and itching of penis, 
771
urination difficult, 
756
Blood stasis in Lungs, sense of smell loss, 
598
Blood stasis in Stomach
epigastric pain, 
737
purple gums, 
620
reddish-purple nose, 
591
regurgitation of food, 
718
swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
726
2474
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
vomiting of blood, 
725
Blood stasis in Uterus
early (short cycle) periods, 
827
fever during menstruation, 
833
heavy periods, 
828
menstrual bleeding stopping and starting, 
830
menstrual clots, 
826
scanty periods, 
828
sticky menstrual blood, 
826
Blood stasis knotted in Interior, abdominal masses, 
856-857
Blood stasis with Blood-Heat, lines on abdomen, 
743
Blood stasis with Damp-Heat
helix dry and contracted, 
584
in Liver channel, purple scrotum, 
770-771
yellow complexion, 
576
Blood stasis with Damp-Phlegm, in skin, acne, 
784
Blood stasis with Heat in Uterus, purple menstrual blood, 
825
Blood stasis with Phlegm
excessive pubic hair, 
773
 
, 
860
goitre, 
604
hoarse voice, 
606
 
, 
820
staggering gait, 
696
unilateral sweating, 
777
wide neck, 
655
Blood stasis with Phlegm-Heat, redness and erosion of pharynx, 
603
Blood stasis with Spleen-Qi sinking, sunken umbilicus, 
745
Blood stasis with Wind and Dryness, psoriasis, 
783
blurred vision, 
360
 
, 
360
 
, 
628
blushing, face, 
579
2475
body
aches, 
317-318
 
, 
318
 
, 
709-710
menstrual symptoms, 
833
loss of feeling, 
710-712
observation
body, mind and complexion, 
1-66
body movements, 
59-66
body shape, physique and demeanour, 
11-29
parts, 
67-200
 
see also individual parts
body build (physique)
classification, 
12
 
, 
25-27
compact type, 
25-26
 
, 
26
muscular type, 
26
 
, 
26
observation, 
11-29
overweight type, 
27
 
, 
27
robust type, 
25
 
, 
25
thin type, 
26-27
 
, 
27
 
See also
 
body shape
Body Fluids
deficiency, 
935
pattern identification, 
927-928
 
, 
935-938
body hair, 
176
 
See also
 
pubic hair
body movements
children, 
194
face, 
60-61
head, 
59-60
limbs/body, 
61-65
observation, 
59-66
body odour, 
549-550
2476
constitutional, 
549
 
, 
550
diagnosis by, 
549-550
Five Elements, 
549-550
body part observation, 
67-200
body shape
abundant in Yang, 
12
 
, 
12-13
abundant in Yin, 
13
 
, 
13-14
classification 
See
 
body shape classification
deficient in Yang, 
14
 
, 
14
deficient in Yin, 
14
 
, 
14-15
Earth type, 
17-18
 
, 
18
Fire type, 
16-17
 
, 
17
high pain/drug tolerance, 
27-28
low pain/drug tolerance, 
28
Metal type, 
19
 
, 
19
observation, 
11-29
strong postnatal Qi, 
23
 
, 
23-24
strong prenatal constitution, 
22
Water type, 
19-20
 
, 
20
weak postnatal Qi, 
24
 
, 
24-25
weak prenatal constitution, 
23
 
, 
23
Wood type, 
15-16
 
, 
16
Yin/Yang in balance, 
15
 
, 
15
 
See also
 
body build (physique)
body shape classification, 
11-29
body build, 
12
 
, 
25-27
Five Elements, 
11
 
, 
15-21
pain/drug tolerance, 
12
 
, 
27-28
prenatal/postnatal influences, 
11
 
, 
21-25
2477
by Yin and Yang, 
11
 
, 
12-15
boiling cauldron pulse, 
506
boils
back (BL-23 Shenshu), 
119
 
, 
706
eyelid, 
639
scalp, 
70
 
, 
568
 
, 
788
borborygmi, 
742-743
bouncing stone pulse, 
507
bowel movements, pain, 
258
brain noise, 
298
 
, 
298
breast(s), 
849-853
gynaecomastia, 
145
 
, 
669-670
nipples 
See
 
nipple(s)
nodularity and tenderness, 
122
observation, 
121-125
organs influencing, 
397
pain, 
398
 
, 
850
palpation, 
513
peau d’orange skin, 
125
 
, 
852
premenstrual distension, 
398
 
, 
399
 
, 
832-833
 
, 
1016
redness and swelling, 
122
 
, 
850
size, 
122
small, 
122
 
, 
852-853
steaming, fever after childbirth, 
847
swollen, 
122
 
, 
850
symptoms, 
397-398
tongue areas, 
123
breast cancer, 
123
 
, 
397
 
, 
397-398
 
, 
462
 
See also
 
cancer
breast milk
2478
after childbirth, 
847
agalactia, 
408
 
, 
408
overfeeding, vomiting, 
864
breastfeeding
agalactia, 
408
 
, 
408
lactation, 
408
 
, 
408
breath
foul, 
111
 
, 
729
shortness of 
(Duan Qi)
 
, 
545
 
, 
661
smell diagnosis, 
550
 
, 
550
breathing
diagnosis by hearing, 
544-545
equalizing, pulse taking, 
447
pathological sounds, 
545
 
, 
545
rebellious-Qi 
(Shang Qi)
 
, 
545
 
, 
661
sighing, 
545
 
, 
670
weak 
(Qi Shao)
 
, 
545
 
, 
661
yawning, 
670
breathlessness 
(Chuan)
 
, 
545
symptoms and signs, 
661-662
breech presentation, 
842
Bright Hall, 
87
Bright-Yang channels
acute fevers, 
373
headache, 
562
patterns, 
967
acupuncture, 
967
clinical manifestations, 
967
prescription, 
967
2479
Bright-Yang organ patterns
acupuncture, 
967
clinical manifestations, 
967
prescription, 
967
tidal fever, 
816
Bu Fei Tang
 
, 
1027
Bu Gan Tang
 
, 
1027
Bu Shen Gu Chong Wan
 
, 
1027
Bu Shen Yang Xue Tang
 
, 
1027
Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang
 
, 
1027
buttocks
pustules and papules, 
119
 
, 
707
ulcers on, 
706-707
2480
C
calves, cramp, 
344
 
, 
700-701
cancer
breast, 
123
 
, 
397
 
, 
397-398
 
, 
462
chemotherapy, 
244
 
, 
817
fever, 
816-817
hand lines, 
136
 
, 
136
hoarse voice, 
543
lung, 
457
malignant melanoma 
See
 
malignant melanoma
nasal carcinoma, 
596
pulse diagnosis, 
462-463
tumours, abdominal cavity, 
128
Western treatments, 
462
candida, 
plate 21.46
 
, 
plate 21.47
occurrence, 
187
pathology and diagnosis
Chinese, 
187-188
Western, 
187
 
, 
187
symptoms and signs, 
787
Cang Er Bi Dou Yan Fang
 
, 
1027-1028
Cang Fu Dao Tan Wan
 
, 
1028
cannabis, 
429-430
carcinoma 
See
 
cancer
carotid artery, pulsation, 
110
 
, 
655
case histories, 
1013-1024
abdominal pain
central–lower abdominal area, 
332-333
2481
constipation, 
273
epigastric pain, 
330
hypochondrial pain, 
331
 
, 
332
tongue/pulse diagnosis, 
244
alternating feeling of heat/cold, 
370-371
arm tremor, 
341
Blood deficiency, 
1015
breast lumps, 
123-124
constipation/abdominal distension, 
273
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen, 
1014
defensive Qi, 
1019-1020
Deficiency–Excess conditions, 
1023
depression, 
1022
diabetes mellitus, 
278-279
diarrhoea, 
272
eczema, 
182
emotional states, 
1022
 
, 
1023
Empty-Heat, 
1022
feeling of cold, 
1018
fertility, 
406-408
gnawing hunger, 
722
hair loss, 
1020
 
, 
1022
infertility (female), 
407-408
 
, 
1013-1015
 
, 
1017-1015
leg oedema, 
160
limbs
arm tremor, 
341
generalized joint pain, 
340
2482
Liver- and Heart-Blood deficiency, 
1015
Liver-Blood deficiency, 
1024
Liver-Blood stasis, 
1024
Liver patterns, 
1024
Liver-Qi stagnation, 
1024
Liver-Yang rising, 
1024
menstrual bleeding, 
399-400
menstrual pain, 
402-404
otitis media, 
1021
palpitations, 
1014
panic attacks, 
385
period pain, 
1016
Phlegm, 
1020
Phlegm-Heat, 
1022
premenstrual breast distension, 
398
 
, 
1016
pulse and clinical application, 
457
 
, 
459
 
, 
460
pulse diagnosis, 
1020
stress, 
1020
 
, 
1022
thirst, 
278-279
tinnitus, 
356
tiredness, 
1022
 
, 
1023
acute onset, 
1023
tongue/pulse diagnosis, 
243-248
 
, 
1022
abdominal extension and pain, 
244
benign positional vertigo, 
247-248
joint pain, 
243
premenstrual tension, 
244-246
2483
ulcerative colitis, 
272
Yin deficiency, 
1021-1022
cataract, 
651
catarrh, chronic, children, 
413
causes of disease
climate, 
428
 
, 
428
diagnosis, 
415-430
diet, 
427-428
drugs as 
See
 
drugs as causes of disease
emotions, 
420-427
excessive sexual activity, 
430
Five Stages of Life, 
417-418
heredity, 
418-419
immunizations, 
429
interactions between, 
416
emotional problems at puberty and overwork, 
416-417
hereditary weak constitution with diet, 
416
trauma and climate, 
416
weak Heart constitution and emotional problems, 
417
medicinal drugs, 
429
overwork, 
427
recreational drugs, 
429-430
trauma, 
428-429
Chai Hu Shu Gan Tang
 
, 
1028
Chang Tai Bai Zhu San
 
, 
1028
channel diagnosis, historical aspects, 
1056-1058
channel patterns
Bright-Yang, 
967
2484
Greater Yang stage, 
965-966
Heat in Bright Yang -, fevers, acute, 
373
channels
abdomen, 
145
back, 
115
 
, 
115
 
, 
116
bladder, 
995
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121-122
 
, 
122
chest, 
143
 
, 
143
Chinese terms, 
1064
connecting 
See
 
Connecting channels
Dampness, 
950
ears, 
105
 
, 
106
eyes, 
76
 
, 
77
 
, 
78
corners of, 
84-85
 
, 
85
gall-bladder, 
996
genitalia, 
149
 
, 
149-150
 
, 
150
gums, 
99
heart, 
994
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
kidneys, 
995
large intestine, 
993-994
liver, 
996
lungs, 
993
mouth and lips, 
93-94
 
, 
94
muscles 
See
 
Muscle channels
nose, 
87-88
 
, 
88
pain, organ 
vs.
 
channel pain, 
259
2485
palpation of, 
525-538
pericardium, 
995
philtrum, 
101
Phlegm in the channels, 
937
skin, 
174
small intestine, 
994-995
spleen, 
994
stomach, 
994
teeth, 
99
 
, 
99
throat and neck, 
109-110
 
, 
110
Triple Burner, 
995-996
 
See also
 
Eight Extraordinary Channels;
 
Twelve
Channels;
 
specific channels
cheeks/cheek-bones, red, 
54
 
, 
plate 3.21,
 
, 
plate 3.22,
 
, 
plate 3.23,
 
, 
plate 3.24
chemotherapy, fever, 
817
Chen Xiang Jiang Qi Tang
 
(Stomach-Qi stagnation), 
1028
chest
abnormal shape, 
668-669
apical pulse palpation, 
512
 
, 
512
areas influenced by organs, 
510
 
, 
510
breasts 
See
 
breast(s)
breathlessness 
See
 
breathlessness 
(Chuan)
channels influencing, 
143
 
, 
143
cough 
See
 
cough/coughing
distension feeling, 
664-665
feeling of heat, 
325
 
, 
325
feeling of oppression/tightness, 
324
 
, 
324
gynaecomastia, 
145
 
, 
669-670
heat feeling, 
665
2486
interrogation, 
321-326
observation, 
143-147
oppressive feeling in, 
664
pain 
See
 
chest pain
palpation of, 
512-513
palpitations 
See
 
palpitations
patterns, 
334
protruding, 
144
 
, 
144
 
, 
145
 
, 
145
 
, 
668
on one side, 
669
protruding sternum, 
144
 
, 
144
 
, 
669
rib pain, 
664
sunken, 
144
 
, 
144
 
, 
145
 
, 
668-669
sunken on one side, 
669
sweating, 
778
symptoms and signs, 
659-670
tenderness, 
512-513
 
, 
513
wheezing 
See
 
wheezing 
(Xiao)
xyphoid process 
See
 
xyphoid process
chest pain, 
323-324
 
, 
324
 
, 
663-664
case history, 
387-388
patterns, 
334
ribs, 
664
chickenpox, 
180
 
, 
180
 
, 
870
shingles after 
See
 
herpes zoster (shingles)
childbirth, 
406-408
 
, 
408
breech presentation, 
842
convulsions after, 
155
effect on baby, 
412
2487
gynaecological symptoms and signs, 
843-848
lochia observation after, 
166-167
postpartum problems, 
412
 
, 
843-848
abdominal pain, 
844
agalactia, 
408
 
, 
408
Blood rebelling upwards after, 
1003
breast milk, 
847
collapse, 
847-848
constipation, 
845-846
convulsions, 
848
dizziness, 
846
fever, 
846-847
lactation, 
408
 
, 
408
lochia, 
843-844
oedema, 
846
pain, 
844-845
post-natal depression/psychosis, 
847
retention of placenta, 
843
sweating, 
846
urinary difficulty, 
845
vaginal bleeding, 
845
 
See also
 
pregnancy
problems during pregnancy, 
841-842
slow fetal growth, 
842
urticaria after, 
185
 
See also
 
pregnancy
childhood, Five Stages of Life, 
417
Childhood Nutritional Impairment
eyelids loss of control, 
640
itching nose, 
593
2488
swollen nose, 
596
Childhood Nutritional Impairment Nebula, 
648
children
Accumulation Disorder 
See
 
Accumulation Disorder
body movements, 
194
childhood diseases, 
412
chronic catarrh, 
413
chronic cough, 
198
communicating with, 
411
complexion colours
bluish-greenish, 
192
pale, 
192
red, 
191
yellow, 
191-193
congenital kyphosis, 
708
constipation, 
867
constitutional weakness, 
866-867
convulsions, 
198
 
, 
199
 
, 
870-871
coughs/wheezing, 
413
crying, 
868
diarrhoea, 
865
digestive symptoms, 
412
disturbed sleep, 
868
ear problems, 
865
earache, 
413
 
, 
865
ears, 
192
 
, 
192
eyes, 
192
 
, 
192
feet, palpation, 
520
2489
fetus toxin, 
871
fever, 
863-864
fingers palpation, 
520
Five Flaccidities, 
869
Five Retardations, 
869
flapping of nostrils, 
870
fontanelles, 
871-872
gums, lips and throat, 
193
 
, 
194
hands, palpation, 
520
hot palms and soles, 
866
illnesses, residual pathogenic factors, 
975
immunizations, 
412
index finger creases 
See
 
index finger creases (children)
infections, 
870
inflammations, 
869-870
jaundice, 
870
learning difficulties, 
804
limbs
atrophy, 
153
flaccidity, 
154
long penis, 
872
mouth, 
193
 
, 
194
nose, 
192-193
 
, 
193
itching, 
593
root of, 
199
 
, 
199
swollen, 
596
observation, 
191-200
2490
orifices, 
192-194
respiratory problems, 
412-413
 
, 
865
sleeping problems, 
413
slow development, 
413
 
, 
413
spinal muscles, 
194
swollen tonsils, 
193
symptoms, 
411-413
urination problems, 
867
vomiting, 
864-865
white membrane on pupil, 
648
white spots on palate/tongue, 
872
worm infestation, 
199
 
, 
597
 
, 
869
 
See also
 
babies
choking, 
114
 
, 
726
Choppy pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
chronic fatigue syndrome 
See
 
postviral fatigue syndrome
Chuan
 
See
 
breathlessness 
(Chuan)
circling fish pulse, 
506-507
Clear Yang not ascending, clinical manifestations, 
932
climate, 
416
 
, 
428
 
, 
428
coccyx, pain, 
705
coeliac disease, tiredness, 
284-285
Cold
Attack of, 
945
 
, 
945
 
, 
965
Blood stasis from 
See
 
Blood stasis
in channels, stiff knees, 
699
climate, 
428
Empty-Cold 
See
 
Empty-Cold
exterior, 
946
 
, 
946-947
 
, 
947
Heat in Interior, 
988
2491
external, invading Stomach, vomiting, 
724
fetus Cold, 
1003
flattening of lumbar spine, 
708
frozen shoulder, 
656
Full 
See
 
Full-Cold
interior, 
947
internal
bluish-greenish lips, 
622
bluish-greenish nose, 
590
bluish-greenish philtrum, 
626
bluish-greenish sclera, 
635
small or absent lunulae on nails, 
692
strabismus, 
629
with Yang deficiency 
See
 
Yang deficiency
invasion
elbow pain, 
679
joint pain, 
710
knee pain, 
697
invasion, lower backache, 
318
 
, 
947
invasion of Lungs by Wind-Cold, 
901-902
list of spine, 
708
lochia, 
844
pain
characteristics, 
259
in hands, 
682
in limbs, 
672
pathogenic factors, 
946-947
2492
stagnant Cold in Uterus, 
1002-1003
stagnation 
See
 
entries beginning Cold Stagnation
Stomach 
See
 
Stomach-Cold
Stomach deficient and Cold (Stomach-Yang deficiency), 
913-914
stuffiness feeling under Heart, 
666
tongue diagnosis, 
230-231
true Cold–false Heat, 
988
 
, 
989
true Heat–false Cold, 
814
 
, 
989
 
, 
989
 
, 
1022
Uterus deficient and Cold, 
1002
Wind-Cold invasion (Cold prevalent), 
965
 
see also specific organs
cold, feeling of, 
361-367
 
, 
813-814
alternating with heat, 
370-371
aversion to cold, 
363
 
, 
365
 
, 
367-368
aversion to wind, 
362-363
case history, 
1018
cold conditions, 
986-987
cold feet, 
344
cold hands, 
342-343
 
, 
343
contradictory feelings of Cold/Heat, 
817-818
depression, 
381
in exterior conditions, 
365-366
 
, 
366
 
, 
813-814
external invasions, 
365
 
, 
813
 
, 
946
fear of cold, 
363
in interior conditions, 
363-364
 
, 
364
 
, 
366
 
, 
366
 
, 
814
shivers, 
363
 
, 
365
 
, 
813-814
with simultaneous fever, 
367
 
, 
367-370
 
, 
817-818
Wind-Cold 
vs
 
Wind-Heat, 
366
 
, 
366
Cold-Dampness
2493
contraction of fingers, 
687
contraction of limbs, 
677
invasion
elbow pain, 
679
hip pain, 
697
knee pain, 
697
jaundice in children, 
870
limb oedema, 
676
location/sites 
See
 
entries beginning Cold-Dampness
oedema of the feet, 
694
paralysis, 
711
sticky/metallic taste, 
728
thigh pain, 
697
unilateral sweating, 
778
white vaginal discharge, 
857
yellow sclera, 
634
Cold-Dampness in back
cold and heaviness, 
704
 
See also
 
Cold-Dampness in lower back
Cold-Dampness in Bladder channel
anal itching, 
761
coccyx pain, 
705
Cold-Dampness in channels, stiff knees, 
699
Cold-Dampness in Gall-Bladder, jaundice, 
714
Cold-Dampness in Intestines
abdominal fullness, 
741
blood and mucus in stools, 
750
dark urine, 
754
diarrhoea or loose stools, 
747-748
2494
Cold-Dampness in Large Intestine, abdominal pain, lateral-lower, 
740
Cold-Dampness in lower back
lower back and knee weakness, 
705
lower backache, 
703
stiffness of lower back, 
705
Cold-Dampness in lower back and legs, sciatica, 
704
Cold-Dampness in Lower Burner
cold genitals in men, 
769
itching scrotum, 
771
swelling and pain in testicles, 
773
Cold-Dampness in Spleen, 
887
acupuncture, 
887
clinical manifestations, 
887
prescription, 
887
Cold-Dampness in Stomach
epigastric pain, 
737
nausea, 
723
sour regurgitation, 
718
thin pointed fingers, 
687
vomiting, 
724-725
Cold-Dampness in Stomach and Intestines, diarrhoea with vomiting, 
748
Cold-Dampness in Stomach and Spleen
nose polyps, 
598
poor appetite, 
720
sense of smell loss, 
597
yellow lips, 
622
Cold-Dampness in Uterus, watery menstrual blood, 
826
Cold-Dampness on Exterior, absence of sweating, 
780
Cold fetus, Five Retardations, 
869
cold food, excess, 
427
2495
Cold-Heat in Lungs, wheeze in children, 
865
Cold in Bladder, pale and abundant urine, 
754
Cold in Interior, raised fontanelles, 
872
Cold in Intestines
constipation, 
749
umbilical pain, 
738-739
Cold in Liver channel
abdominal pain, lateral-lower, 
740
cold of head, 
563
Peyronie’s disease, 
772
Cold in Lower Burner
cold-watery sperm, 
768
five-colour vaginal discharge, 
858
swelling and pain in testicles, 
773
Cold in Stomach
absence of thirst, 
733
epigastric pain, 
737
gnawing hunger, 
721
hiccup, 
719
nausea, 
723
regurgitation of food, 
718
retching, 
725
vomiting, 
724
Cold in Uterus
after childbirth, 
844
constipation after childbirth, 
846
infertility (female), 
855
late (long cycle) periods, 
827
menstrual bleeding stopping and starting, 
830
2496
menstrual clots, 
826
retention of placenta, 
843
scanty periods, 
828
Cold invading Stomach, 
916
acupuncture, 
916
clinical manifestations, 
916
prescription, 
916
Cold on Exterior, Heat in Interior, absence of sweating, 
780
Cold-Phlegm
clinical manifestations, 
936
dark eyelids, 
638
swollen eyelids, 
639
Cold-Phlegm in Lungs, 
902
acupuncture, 
902
breathlessness, 
662
chronic cough, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
902
prescription, 
902
spoon-shaped fingers, 
687
wheeze in children, 
865
wheezing, 
662
Cold retention, vulvar sores, 
858
cold sores, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
309
 
, 
610-611
 
, 
plate 21.48
 
See also
 
herpes simplex
Cold stagnation, distended abdominal veins, 
743
Cold stagnation in Liver channel, 
895
acupuncture, 
895
clinical manifestations, 
895
cold genitals in men, 
769
contraction of scrotum, 
769
2497
dark scrotum, 
771
feeling of cold in abdomen, 
742
prescription, 
895
Cold stagnation in Uterus, painful periods, 
828
Cold transformation, 
968
colicky pain, 
256
collapse, after childbirth, 
847-848
complexion colours
bluish/greenish, 
55-56
 
, 
577-578
 
, 
plate 3.32
bluish-purple, 
57
changes during chronic disease, 
49
children 
See
 
children
conforming/opposing colour, 
44-46
 
, 
48-49
clinical significance, 
46
Five Elements, 
45
 
, 
45
patterns, 
44-45
 
, 
45
 
, 
46
dark, 
56
 
, 
578
depression, 
381
distinct/obscure colour, 
42-43
 
, 
plate 3.3,
 
, 
plate 3.4,
 
, 
plate 3.30,
 
,
plate 3.31
dominant colours, 
40-41
emotions and spirit, 
49-50
environmental/lifestyle factors, 
40
 
, 
50
floating red, 
54
 
, 
plate 3.25
greenish/bluish, 
55-56
guest colours, 
40-41
lustre/lustreless colour, 
44
 
, 
47
normal, 
50-51
 
, 
plate 3.9
2498
observation, 
39-58
body, mind and complexion, 
1-66
complexion colour, 
39-58
different aspects of, 
42-50
prognosis determination, 
47-49
Simple Questions, 
47
purple, 
56-57
 
, 
578
red, 
54
 
, 
577
 
, 
plate 3.1,
 
, 
plate 3.2,
 
, 
plate 3.3,
 
, 
plate 3.4,
 
, 
plate 3.5,
 
,
plate 3.6,
 
, 
plate 3.26,
 
, 
plate 3.27,
 
, 
plate 3.28
reddish-purple, 
56-57
sallow, 
52
 
, 
578-579
scattered/concentrated colour, 
43
 
, 
plate 3.5,
 
, 
plate 3.6
Simple Questions, 
47
spirit and emotions, 
36
 
, 
37
superficial/deep colour, 
42
 
, 
plate 3.28,
 
, 
plate 3.29
symptoms and signs, 
575-579
thin/thick colour, 
43-44
 
, 
48
 
, 
plate 3.7,
 
, 
plate 3.8,
 
, 
plate 3.26,
 
, 
plate
3.27
white, 
51-52
 
, 
575-576
bluish white, 
52
bright white, 
51
 
, 
plate 3.10
dull white, 
51
 
, 
plate 3.11
pale white, 
51
 
, 
plate 3.12
sallow white, 
51
 
, 
plate 3.13,
 
, 
plate 3.14
yellow, 
52-54
 
, 
576-577
 
, 
plate 3.7
ash-like yellow, 
53
 
, 
plate 3.19
bluish-yellow, 
52
bright yellow (jaundice), 
53-54
2499
dry-yellow, 
53
 
, 
plate 3.18
dull yellow, 
52
 
, 
plate 3.15
floating reddish-yellow, 
53
floating yellow, 
53
 
, 
plate 3.17
greyish-yellow, 
52
 
, 
plate 3.16
rich-yellow, 
53
 
, 
plate 3.20
Yang yellow, 
53
Yin yellow, 
54
 
See also
 
jaundice
concentration difficulties, 
804
concha 
See
 
ear(s)
Connecting channels, 
525-527
body cavities, 
526
energetic layers, 
525-526
 
, 
526
palpation, 
526-527
pressing, 
527
stroking, 
527
techniques, 
527
touching, 
527
constipation, 
270-271
after childbirth, 
845-846
case history, 
273
in children, 
867
definition, 
748
loose stools alternation, 
749-750
in pregnancy, 
839-840
premenstrual symptoms, 
405
 
, 
834
symptoms and signs, 
748-749
constitutional traits
2500
and diet, causes of disease, 
416
observation, 
9-10
prenatal constitution, body shape, 
22
 
, 
23
 
, 
23
and spirit, 
34-36
strong spirit/strong constitution, 
35
strong spirit/weak constitution, 
36
weak spirit/strong constitution, 
35
weak spirit/weak constitution, 
35
weakness, 
866-867
constipation in children, 
867
and diet, 
416
heart deficiency, 
866
contraceptive pill, 
396-397
contraction
fingers, 
63
 
, 
65
 
, 
130-131
 
, 
131
 
, 
686-687
limbs, 
155
 
, 
155
convulsions
after childbirth, 
848
in children
acute, 
870-871
chronic, 
870-871
children, index finger creases, 
198
 
, 
199
fetus toxin, 
871
limbs, 
155-156
 
, 
156
pregnancy (eclampsia), 
841
cornea 
See
 
eye(s)
coronary heart disease, hand lines, 
134
 
, 
134
corticosteroids, effects on tongue, 
204
2501
Cou Li
 
, 
169
 
, 
169-170
 
, 
525
cough/coughing, 
322-323
 
, 
323
acute, 
322
 
, 
323
 
, 
659-660
blood, 
660-661
case history, 
323
children, 
413
in children, 
865
chronic, 
322
 
, 
323
 
, 
660
diagnosis by, 
545-546
 
, 
546
in pregnancy, 
840
cramp, calves, 
344
 
, 
700-701
Crane Knee Wind, atrophy, 
153
craving, 
426
 
, 
426
for sweets, 
722
Crohn’s disease, 
272
crying out, 
543
 
, 
822
cutaneous regions, 
5
cysts, breast, 
122
2502
D
Da Bu Yin Wan
 
, 
1028
Da Bu Yuan Jian
 
, 
1028
Da Ding Feng Zhu
 
, 
1028
Damp-Cold
frozen shoulder, 
656
retention, rigidity of lower back, 
705
shoulder ache, 
656
upper backache, 
656
Damp-Cold in Bladder, 
925-926
acupuncture, 
925
clinical manifestations, 
925
prescription, 
926
Damp-Cold in Gall Bladder, 
918
acupuncture, 
918
clinical manifestations, 
918
prescription, 
918
Damp-Dryness, Lungs, chronic cough, 
660
Damp-Heat, 
370
abdominal masses, 
744
acupuncture, 
955
brain noise, 
298
candida, 
787
case history, 
1014
 
, 
1015
chronic, yellow complexion, 
576
climate, 
428
clinical manifestations, 
954-955
crying out, 
822
2503
elbow pain, 
679
external invasion, tinea (ringworm) of hands, 
684
facial pain, 
302
 
, 
303
 
, 
571
fever in cancer, 
816
five-colour vaginal discharge, 
857
Gall-Bladder and Liver, pain in ribs, 
324
greasy hair, 
567
greasy skin, 
781-782
head, feeling of heaviness, 
297
heaviness feeling
in legs, 
699
in limbs, 
673
hot hands and feet, 
672-673
invasion of, diarrhoea in children, 
865
irritability, 
802
itching hands, 
683
jaundice in children, 
870
knee pain, 
697
limb oedema, 
676
low-grade fever in children, 
864
mid-cycle menstrual bleeding, 
829
naevi (moles), 
787
numbness/tingling in limbs, 
673
numbness/tingling of hands, 
683
oedema after childbirth, 
846
oedema of the feet, 
693
pain in foot, 
697
2504
pain in limbs, 
672
paralysis, 
711
patterns, 
893
prescription, 
955
red complexion, 
577
red eye corners, 
637
red-white vaginal discharge, 
857
retention, vesicles on lower back, 
706
in specific systems 
See
 
entries beginning Damp-Heat (below)
spots on the back, 
706
sticky/metallic taste, 
728
stiff knees, 
699
thigh pain, 
696-697
tinea, 
786
tiredness, 
285
 
, 
286
ulcers on lower leg, 
701
vaginal discharge, 
857
white vaginal discharge, 
857
yellow sclera, 
634
yellow sweat, 
777
yellow vaginal discharge, 
857
Damp-Heat and Toxic Heat in Liver channel, swelling of vulva, 
858-859
Damp-Heat in abdomen, sunken umbilicus, 
745
Damp-Heat in Bladder, 
925
abdominal pain - central, lower, 
739
acupuncture, 
925
anal fissure, 
762
blood in urine, 
758
2505
clinical manifestations, 
925
dark urine, 
753
dribbling of urine, 
757
frequent urination, 
756
painful urination, 
839
papules or pustules on buttocks, 
707
prescription, 
925
red sclera, 
635
scanty and difficult urination, 
755
sperm in urine, 
759
urination difficult, 
755
urination painful, 
754
urine retention, 
839
Damp-Heat in Bladder channel
anal itching, 
761
anal prolapse, 
762
coccyx pain, 
705
haemorrhoids, 
761-762
Damp-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001
bleeding on intercourse, 
860
Damp-Heat in Ears, 
977
Damp-Heat in Gall-Bladder, 
917-918
acupuncture, 
918
bleeding from ears, 
583
blood vessels distended on ear, 
586
clinical manifestations, 
917-918
concha swelling and redness, 
586
ear discharge, 
583
2506
earache, 
582
itching ears, 
582
itching eyes, 
631
jaundice, 
714
prescription, 
918
rash in axillae, 
785
sense of smell loss, 
597
swollen ears, 
584
wax production excess, 
583
yellow helix, 
585
Damp-Heat in Gall-Bladder, Liver, Stomach and Spleen, aversion to food, 
721
Damp-Heat in Gall-Bladder and Liver, 
374
 
, 
893
 
, 
917
abdominal pain (hypochondrial area), 
738
acupuncture, 
893
 
, 
917
bad smell sensation, 
597
bitter taste, 
727
blocked nose, 
592
clinical manifestations, 
893
 
, 
917
distension feeling in eyes, 
642
herpes zoster, 
786
prescription, 
893
 
, 
917
protruding eyeball, 
643
red helix, 
586
rib pain, 
664
sweating in axillae, 
779
thirst, 
731-732
yellow nails, 
691
Damp-Heat in Governing Vessel, anal itching, 
761
2507
Damp-Heat in Head, 
977-978
hot and painful eyes, 
632
Damp-Heat in Intestines
abdominal fullness, 
741
blood and mucus in stools, 
750
blood in stools, 
751
borborygmi (bowel sounds), 
743
diarrhoea or loose stools, 
747
difficulty in defecation, 
751
mucus in stools, 
751
red philtrum, 
626
straining in defecation, 
752
umbilical pain, 
739
Damp-Heat in joints, joint pain, 
710
Damp-Heat in Large Intestine, 
921
abdominal pain, lateral-lower, 
740
cold sores, 
611
tooth cavities, 
616
toothache, 
615
Damp-Heat in Liver, 
893
acupuncture, 
893
blood in urine, 
758
clinical manifestations, 
893
dark urine, 
753
leukoplakia, 
859
prescription, 
893
Damp-Heat in Liver channel
boils on scalp, 
568
2508
dandruff, 
567
genital eczema (female), 
858
genital eczema (women), 
858
herpes simplex, 
786
itching scalp, 
567
leukoplakia, 
859
long penis in children, 
872
premature ejaculation, 
766
priapism, 
768
red scrotum, 
770
redness and swelling of glans penis, 
772
sticky yellow nipple discharge, 
851
stiffness of back like tight belt, 
657
swollen and oozing scrotum, 
770
ulcers on penis, 
772
ulcers on the scalp, 
568
vaginal itching, 
858
vulval swelling, 
858-859
warts, 
787
Damp-Heat in lower back, lower back and knee weakness, 
705
Damp-Heat in lower back and legs, sciatica, 
704
Damp-Heat in Lower Burner
blood in sperm, 
768
dark philtrum, 
626
impotence, 
765
itching scrotum, 
771
nocturnal emissions, 
767
pain and itching of penis, 
771
2509
Damp-Heat in Penetrating Vessel, gynaecomastia, 
670
Damp-Heat in skin
acne, 
569
 
, 
783
herpes simplex, 
785
herpes zoster, 
786
itching, 
713
Damp-Heat in Spleen
acupuncture, 
887
 
, 
956
 
, 
970
clinical manifestations, 
887
 
, 
956
 
, 
970
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
prescription, 
887
 
, 
956
 
, 
970
red grains inside eyelids, 
641
sweet taste, 
727
yellow nose, 
589-590
Damp-Heat in Spleen and Kidneys, yellow colour on lower back, 
706
Damp-Heat in Spleen channel, itching nose, 
593
Damp-Heat in Stomach, 
916
acupuncture, 
916
 
, 
956
clinical manifestations, 
916
 
, 
956
cold sores, 
610
epigastric pain, 
737
hot hands, 
681
hunger with no desire to eat, 
721
prescription, 
916
 
, 
956
red, itching and swollen fingers, 
785
regurgitation of food, 
718
sore throat, 
601
sour regurgitation, 
718
2510
thin pointed fingers, 
687
toothache, 
615
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Intestines, 
374
 
, 
815
Damp-Heat in Stomach and Spleen, 
977
blocked nose, 
592
boil on head, 
788
carbuncles on neck, 
788
case history, 
1014
contracted pupils, 
650
dry mouth, 
733
flat philtrum, 
625
inverted eyelashes, 
650
itching around mouth, 
611
limb flaccidity, 
675
night sweating, 
776
nose polyps, 
598
poor appetite, 
720
red eyelids, 
637
runny nose, 
592
sense of smell loss, 
597
stye on eyelids, 
637
sweating of hands and feet, 
778
swollen lips, 
623
swollen nose, 
596
thirst, 
731
tooth cavities, 
616
ulcers on nose, 
598
2511
vomiting in children, 
864
yellow and dry teeth, 
618
yellow fluid between iris and pupil, 
649
yellow lips, 
622
yellow nails, 
691
Damp-Heat in Stomach channel, nose pain, 
595
Damp-Heat in Stomach steaming upwards, sweating on head, 
778
Damp-Heat in Stomach with Spleen-Qi deficiency, mouth ulcers during menstruation,
834
Damp-Heat in Uterus
painful periods, 
829
sticky menstrual blood, 
826
Damp-Heat invasion in Gall-Bladder and Liver channels, ear problems in children, 
865
Damp-Heat invasion in Lesser-Yang channels, ear problems in children, 
865
Damp-Heat with predominance of Dampness, eczema, 
783
Damp-Heat with predominance of Heat, eczema, 
782
Damp-Heat with Toxic-Heat
herpes simplex, 
786
warts, 
787
withered and thickened nails, 
690
Damp-Heat with Toxic-Heat and Liver-Fire, vulvar sores, 
858
Damp-Phlegm
abdominal distension (bloating), 
327
abdominal masses, 
744
 
, 
857
gynaecological symptom, 
857
acne, 
569
chronic cough, 
323
clinical manifestations, 
936
glue ear, 
865
greasy skin, 
781
2512
head heaviness feeling, 
561
hemiplegia, 
711
numbness of half the body, 
712
numbness of head, 
563
obesity, 
319
pain in foot, 
698
Damp-Phlegm in Intestines, borborygmi (bowel sounds), 
743
Damp-Phlegm in Lower Burner
sagging lower abdomen, 
745
scrotum drooping to one side, 
769
vulval swelling, 
858
Damp-Phlegm in Lungs, 
902
 
, 
976
acupuncture, 
902
 
, 
976
breathlessness, 
662
chronic cough, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
902
 
, 
976
cough in pregnancy, 
840
prescription, 
902
 
, 
976
snoring, 
811
 
, 
821
swollen nose, 
596
wheezing, 
662-663
Damp-Phlegm in Middle Burner, epigastric lumps, 
744
Damp-Phlegm in skin, acne, 
784
Damp-Phlegm in Spleen, sleepiness after eating, 
723
Damp-Phlegm in Spleen and Lungs, streaming eyes, 
633
Damp-Phlegm in Uterus
amenorrhoea, 
829
late (long cycle) periods, 
827
pale menstrual blood, 
825
2513
sticky menstrual blood, 
826
Damp-Phlegm obstructing Spleen
abdominal distension (bloating), 
741
loss of taste, 
728
nodules within eyelids, 
640
Damp-Phlegm with Qi deficiency, obesity, 
714
Dampness, 
948
 
, 
977-978
abdomen, 
326
acute, 
950
body aches, 
709
candida, 
787
chronic, 
950
climate, 
428
clinical manifestations, 
948
 
, 
949
concentration difficulties, 
804
digestive symptoms, 
262
external, 
949
 
, 
949-950
glue ear, 
865
greasy hair, 
566-567
greasy skin, 
781
groaning, 
822
groin pain, 
698
head, feeling of distension, 
297
head heaviness feeling, 
561
headache, 
561
heaviness feeling in legs, 
699
heaviness feeling in limbs, 
673
internal, 
950
2514
invasion, joint pain, 
710
itching hands, 
343
 
, 
683
joint pain, 
318
muzziness (fuzziness) of head, 
563
numbness of half the body, 
712
numbness/tingling in limbs, 
673
numbness/tingling of hands, 
683
oedema of body, 
713
pain in foot, 
697
pain in hands, 
682
pain in limbs, 
672
pathogenic factors, 
948-950
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Dampness, somnolence, 
810
stiff knees, 
699
tongue diagnosis, 
230
Turbid Dampness surrounding the heart, 
883
yellow complexion, 
576
 
See also
 
Cold-Dampness; 
entries beginning
Dampness (below);
 
Wind-Dampness
Dampness and Phlegm in Uterus, 
1002
Dampness in Bladder, turbid urine, 
754
Dampness in channels, numbness/tingling, 
712
Dampness in Gall-Bladder, otitis media, 
1021
Dampness in Intestines
constipation, 
749
mucus in stools, 
751
Dampness in Lower Burner
with Blood stasis in Liver channel, Peyronie’s disease, 
772
dyspareunia, 
859
infertility (female), 
855
2515
lack of libido (female), 
860
libido, lack of in women, 
860
Dampness in muscles
muscle ache in limbs, 
671
retention
limb paralysis, 
677
paralysis of legs, 
695
Dampness in nasal passage, nasal voice, 
821
Dampness in skin, itching, 
713
Dampness in Spleen, pain in soles of feet, 
698
Dampness in Stomach, 
1019
Dampness in Stomach and Spleen, 
977
absence of thirst, 
733
yellow palate, 
625
Dampness obstructing Middle Burner, loss of taste, 
728
Dan Shen Yin
 
, 
1028-1029
Dan Zhi Xiao Yao San
 
, 
1029
dandruff, 
73
 
, 
73
hair, 
567
Dang Gui Ji Xue Teng Tang
 
, 
1029
Dang Gui Long Hui Wan
 
, 
1029
Dang Gui Shao Yao San
 
, 
1029
Dang Gui Si Ni Tang
 
, 
1029
Dang Gui Zhi Tang
 
, 
1029
dangerous conditions, indication by pulse qualities, 
506-507
Dao Chi Qing Xin Tang
 
, 
1029
Dao Chi San
 
, 
1029-1030
Dao Han
 
(night sweating), 
776
daytime pain, 
257
daytime sweating, 
351
 
, 
351
deafness, 
355
 
, 
356-357
 
, 
357
 
See also
 
tinnitus
2516
Deep Connecting channels, 
526
 
See also
 
Connecting channels
Deep pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
defecation
difficulty in, 
751-752
interrogation, 
269
 
, 
270
straining in, 
752
symptoms and signs, 
747-752
 
See also
 
stools
Defensive Qi 
See
 
Qi,
 
Defensive
Deficiency, pain characteristics, 
259
Deficiency–Excess conditions, 
1023
Deficient Yang floating, red complexion, 
577
demeanour, observation, 
11-29
depression
antidepressants, effect on pulse, 
507-508
case history, 
1022
in Chinese medicine, 
381-382
definition, 
380-381
diagnosis, 
381
with manic behaviour 
See
 
mania
patterns, 
382-384
 
, 
383
 
, 
384
post-natal, 
847
signs, 
381
symptoms and signs, 
381
 
, 
797-798
tiredness, 
283
 
, 
284
 
See also
 
mental-emotional symptoms
dermatitis 
See
 
eczema
dermographism, 
181
 
, 
plate 21.10
Di Sheng Tang
 
, 
1030
Di Tan Tang
 
, 
1030
diabetes mellitus, thirst, case histories, 
278-279
diagnosis
2517
of causes of disease, 
415-430
by hearing and smelling, 
539-552
by interrogation, 
233-251
microsystems, 
8
 
, 
8-9
by observation, 
1-233
by palpation, 
431-538
Diaphragm
choking, 
114
 
, 
726
Phlegm-Fluids, 
937
residual Heat in, insomnia, 
808
Diaphragm-Heat
anxiety, 
800
depression, 
798
diarrhoea, 
271
case history, 
272
in children, 
865
loose stools, 
747-748
menstrual symptoms, 
833-834
premenstrual symptoms, 
405
vomiting with, 
748
diet, 
427-428
cold food, 
427
eating habits, 
428
 
, 
428
food choice, 
427
 
, 
428
greasy food, 
427
hereditary weak constitution with diet, 
416
hot food, 
427
not eating enough, 
427
2518
digestive symptoms, 
263
children, 
412
main patterns, 
262-263
 
, 
263
Ding Xiang Shi Di Tang
 
, 
1030
Directing and Penetrating Vessels
Blood stasis in, 
1000
Damp-Heat in, 
1001
deficient and cold, 
999-1000
empty, 
999
Empty-Heat in, 
1001
Full-Cold in, 
1001-1002
Full-Heat in, 
1000-1001
Stagnant Heat in, 
1001
unstable, 
999
Directing Vessel 
(Ren Mai)
 
, 
998
abdomen, 
145
 
, 
146
 
, 
515
chest, 
143
 
, 
513
Damp-Heat in the Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
860
Directing and Penetrating Vessel disharmony 
See
 
Penetrating
Vessel and Directing Vessels disharmony
genitalia, 
149
 
, 
150
mouth, 
93
 
, 
94
neck and throat, 
109
 
, 
109
 
See also
 
Directing and Penetrating
Vessels;
 
Penetrating Vessel 
(Chong Mai)
disease
causes of disease 
See
 
causes of disease
diagnosis of causes, 
415-430
distending pain (‘
Zhang Tong’)
 
, 
255-256
distension (bloating)
2519
abdomen, 
146
 
, 
146
 
, 
255-256
 
, 
264
 
, 
326-327
fullness 
vs
 
, 
511
 
, 
740-741
symptoms and signs, 
735
 
, 
740-741
case history, 
244
 
See also
 
fullness
diuretics, effect on pulse, 
508
dizziness, 
295-296
 
, 
559-560
after childbirth, 
846
interrogation, 
295-296
menstrual symptoms, 
835
in pregnancy, 
840
underlying patterns, 
296
dreaming, 
347
excessive, 
348
 
, 
349
 
, 
350
 
, 
808-809
recurrent, 
348
significance of dreams, 
809
 
See also
 
sleep
drinks/drinking
hot/cold drink preference, 
279
interrogation, 
277-279
pain, 
258
symptoms and signs, 
731-733
 
See also
 
thirst
drug tolerance, body shape, 
27-28
 
, 
28
drugs as causes of disease
adverse drug reactions, 
429
medicinal drugs, 
429
recreational drugs, 
429-430
dry and brittle hair, 
72-73
 
, 
73
 
, 
566
dry eyes, 
360
 
, 
360
Dry-Heat, 
370
 
, 
955
clinical manifestations, 
955
2520
intestines, 
955
Dry-Heat in Intestines, fever in children, 
863-864
Dry-Heat in Lungs, 
645
itching nose, 
593
nosebleed, 
595
dry mouth, 
279
Dry-Phlegm
chronic cough, 
322
clinical manifestations, 
936
Dry-Phlegm in Lungs, 
811
 
, 
821
Dryness, 
901
 
, 
951
 
, 
951
injuring Lungs, 
593
pathogenic factors, 
950-951
Dryness in Intestines and Liver-Blood deficiency, 
752
Dryness in Lungs, 
782
Dryness invading Lungs, 
605
Duan Qi
 
(shortness of breath), 
545
 
, 
661
Duo Ming San
 
, 
1030
Dupuytren’s contracture, 
63
dyspareunia, 
859
2521
E
E Jiao Ji Zi Huang Tang
 
, 
1030
ear(s), 
355-357
abnormal colour, 
107-108
abnormal size, 
107
 
, 
584
bleeding, 
583
blood vessels distended, 
108
 
, 
586
channels influencing, 
105
 
, 
106
children, 
192
 
, 
192
 
, 
413
 
, 
865-866
concha, swelling and redness, 
108
 
, 
586-587
contracted, 
107
 
, 
584
Damp-Heat, 
977
discharge, 
108
 
, 
108
 
, 
583
earache, 
357
 
, 
357
 
, 
413
 
, 
582
helix
abnormal colour, 
107
 
, 
585-586
dry and contracted, 
107
 
, 
584
interrogation, 
355-357
itching, 
357
 
, 
357
 
, 
582
large, 
106
as microsystem, 
8
normal, 
106
observation, 
105-108
 
, 
1056
problems in children, 
865-866
red back of, 
108
 
, 
586
red helix, 
plate 9.2
signs, 
106
 
, 
106
2522
size, 
106-107
small, 
106
sores, 
107
 
, 
584
swollen, 
107
 
, 
584
 
, 
plate 9.1,
 
, 
plate 9.2
symptoms and signs, 
581-588
tinnitus 
See
 
tinnitus
warts, 
107
 
, 
585
wax production, excess, 
108
 
, 
583-584
 
See also
 
deafness
earache, 
357
 
, 
357
 
, 
413
 
, 
582
Earth
Water insulting Earth, 
1009
Wood overacting on Earth, 
1008
Earth insulting Wood, 
1009
Earth not generating Metal, 
1008
Earth overacting on Water, 
1008
Earth Rampart, 
79
Earth type
abdomen size, 
146
body odour, 
549
 
, 
550
body shape, 
17-18
 
, 
18
face, 
plate 1.4
Fire not generating Earth, 
1008
voice, 
542
 
, 
542
eclampsia, 
841
eczema, 
plate 21.13,
 
, 
plate 21.14,
 
, 
plate 21.15,
 
, 
plate 21.17
acute, 
plate 21.11
case history, 
182
chronic, 
plate 21.12,
 
, 
plate 21.18,
 
, 
plate 21.20
genital (women), 
858
2523
pathology and diagnosis
Chinese, 
181-182
Western, 
181
scales on skin, 
179
 
, 
181
symptoms and signs, 
782-783
Eight Extraordinary Channels
combined Directing/Penetrating Vessel, 
999-1003
Directing Vessel 
(Ren Mai)
 
, 
998
combined Penetrating Vessel patterns, 
999-1003
Girdle Vessel 
(Dai Mai)
 
, 
1003-1004
Governing Vessel 
(Du Mai)
 
, 
997-998
pattern identification, 
981
 
, 
997-1006
Penetrating Vessel 
(Chong Mai)
 
, 
998-999
combined Directing Vessel pattern, 
999-1003
Yang Heel Vessel 
(Yang Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yang Linking Vessel 
(Yang Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
Yin Heel Vessel 
(Yin Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Linking Vessel 
(Yin Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
Eight Principles, 
497-498
 
, 
927
Full–Empty, 
988-991
Hot–Cold, 
985-988
interior/exterior, 
984-985
pattern identification, 
981
 
, 
983-991
Yin–Yang, 
991
Eight Ramparts, 
79
 
, 
79
ejaculation
excessive sexual activity, 
430
inability, 
767-768
2524
nocturnal emissions, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
767
premature, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
766-767
tiredness/dizziness after, 
393
 
, 
768
elbows, painful, 
342
 
, 
342
 
, 
679
elderly
body odour, 
550
diaphragm choking, 
114
 
, 
726
dizziness, 
295
Five Stages of Life, 
418
headache, 
288
kyphosis, 
708
limbs
contraction, 
155
rigidity, 
154
pulse variation in, 
450
 
, 
461
emotional states
case histories, 
1022
 
, 
1023
patient interrogation, 
250
voice reflection, 
542
emotional symptoms
oppression feeling in chest, 
664
puberty and overwork, 
416-417
pulse clinical application, 
458-459
 
, 
459
pustules on back, 
118
worry/overthinking, 
386-387
 
See also
 
mental-emotional symptoms
emotions, 
420-427
anger 
See
 
anger
anxiety 
See
 
anxiety
2525
Chinese terms, 
1064
craving, 
426
 
, 
426
fear 
See
 
fear
grief, 
424-425
 
, 
425
 
See also
 
grief
guilt, 
426-427
 
, 
427
hatred, 
426
 
, 
426
inappropriate laughter, 
795
and internal organs, 
422
joy, 
423
 
, 
423
excess, 
388
 
, 
389
 
, 
794
 
See also
 
mania
love (obsessional/misdirected), 
425-426
 
, 
426
observation of mind, spirit and emotions, 
31-38
pensiveness, 
424
 
, 
424
puberty and overwork, 
416-417
sadness 
See
 
sadness
severe timidity, 
795
shock 
See
 
shock
and spirit, 
36-37
complexion, 
36
 
, 
37
eyes, 
36
 
, 
37
 
, 
75
 
, 
80
tongue, 
36
 
, 
37
startled easily, 
793-794
symptoms and signs, 
791-795
weak Heart constitution and, 
417
worry 
See
 
worry
emotions line, 
133
 
, 
133
emphysema
2526
heartbeat, 
128
spoon-shaped fingers, 
131
 
, 
131
Emptiness of Sea of Marrow
brain noise, 
298
 
, 
564
drooping head, 
563-564
leaning of head to one side, 
564
learning difficulties (children), 
804
Empty-Blood, 
990
Empty-Cold, 
364
anal fistula, 
762
vs
 
Full-Cold, 
947
interior, 
947
pale philtrum, 
625-626
Empty-Cold in Liver channel
glaucoma, 
641
streaming eyes, 
633-634
Empty-Cold in Lower Burner, 
769
Empty-Cold in Uterus, 
838
Empty-Cold with Qi stagnation, 
147
Empty-Fire, 
951
vs
 
Full-Fire, 
952
Empty-Heat, 
986
 
, 
986
anal fistula, 
762
case history, 
1022
dry skin, 
782
face, 
301
vs
 
Full-Heat, 
371
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat,
insomnia, 
808
2527
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
excessive dreaming, 
809
sleep talking, 
810
hot flushes, 
302
Kidney- and Liver Yin deficiency with, 
909
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency with, 
909-910
Kidney and Heart not harmonized (Kidney- and Heart-Yin
deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat), 
803
 
, 
909
Kidney-Yin deficiency with, 
906
Liver-Yin deficiency with, 
896
sleep talking, 
810
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
excessive dreaming, 
809
sleep walking, 
811
Lung-Yin deficiency with, 
900
red palms of hands, 
681
Stomach-Yin deficiency with, 
914
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
Yin deficiency with Empty Heat, 
932
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency
chronic fever, 
374
fever, chronic, 
374
 
, 
815
Empty-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001
Empty Latent Heat, 
960
Empty pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Empty-Qi, 
990
Empty-Wind
eclampsia, 
841
Liver, 
970-971
2528
Empty-Wind agitating in Interior
acupuncture, 
957
clinical manifestations, 
957
prescription, 
957
Empty-Yang, 
990
Empty-Yin, 
990
endometriosis, hand lines, 
135
energetic layers
channels, 
525-526
 
, 
526
skin, 
516
 
, 
517
energy levels, 
281-286
patient interrogation, 
250
 
See also
 
exhaustion 
(Xu Lao)
epigastrium, 
145
 
, 
145
 
, 
146
areas and palpation, 
515
 
, 
515
lumps, 
147
 
, 
744-745
pain in, 
329
 
, 
329
 
, 
737-738
case histories, 
330
patterns, 
331
spleen/stomach relationship, 
515
 
See also
 
abdomen
epilepsy
convulsions, 
155-156
tremor/spasticity, 
62
Er Chen Tang
 
, 
1030
Er Zhi Wan
 
, 
1030
erectile dysfunction, 
392
 
, 
392
hand lines, 
135
 
, 
135
symptoms/signs, 
765-766
erosion, skin, 
179
 
, 
179
erysipelas, 
870
Ethereal Soul 
(Hun)
2529
depression, 
382
Mind and mood, 
382
 
, 
382
movement of, 
382
 
, 
382
 
, 
383
 
, 
383
excess joy, 
388
 
, 
389
 
, 
794
excessive dreaming, 
348
 
, 
349
 
, 
350
 
, 
808-809
excretions
lochia 
See
 
lochia
menstrual blood 
See
 
menstrual bleeding
nasal discharge, 
164
 
, 
164
observation, 
163-167
smell, 
550-551
sputum 
See
 
sputum
stools 
See
 
stools
sweat 
See
 
sweat/sweating
urine 
See
 
urine
vaginal discharge 
See
 
vaginal discharge
exhaustion 
(Xu Lao)
 
, 
282
dark nose, 
591
historical aspects, 
282
 
See also
 
tiredness
exterior Wind 
See
 
Wind,
 
exterior
external invasion
contraction of fingers, 
687
fever in children, 
863-864
external pathogens, pulse, 
468
external toxins, convulsions/fever after childbirth, 
846
 
, 
848
External Wind-Cold, channels of face
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
facial paralysis, 
573
facial tic, 
573
2530
Extreme Heat generating Wind, 
893-894
acupuncture, 
894
clinical manifestations, 
893-894
 
, 
945
prescription, 
894
eye(s), 
357-360
area around, greenish/bluish complexion, 
55
areas of, 
78
 
, 
78-79
bladder and, 
78
blepharoconjunctivitis, 
643-644
blurred vision, 
360
 
, 
360
breast lumps and, 
123
cataract, 
651
channels influencing 
See
 
channels
children, 
192
 
, 
192
closed, 
650
control of, 
36
 
, 
80-81
cornea, 
646-647
opacity, 
646-647
scarring after opacity, 
647
corners, 
78
 
, 
79
 
, 
81
abnormal colours, 
84-85
 
, 
85
 
, 
636-637
pale, 
636
red, 
636-637
deviation of, 
71
 
, 
573
discharge from, 
84
 
, 
84
 
, 
634
distension feeling, 
641-642
drooping red membrane, 
645-646
2531
dry, 
360
 
, 
360
 
, 
631-632
ecchymosis under conjunctiva, 
644-645
Eight Ramparts, 
79
 
, 
79
eye/mouth deviation, 
60
 
, 
60
feeling of distension, 
360
Five Wheels, 
78-79
 
, 
79
floaters, 
358
 
, 
628
gall-bladder and, 
77-78
glaucoma, 
641
heart, 
75
 
, 
77
inability to shut or open, 
650
internal organ relationship, 
76-78
 
, 
78
interrogation, 
357-360
itching, 
359
 
, 
359
 
, 
631
kidneys and, 
77
lashes, inverted, 
650-651
liver and, 
76-77
lustre, 
36
 
, 
75
 
, 
80
 
, 
plate 6.1
movement of, 
80-81
normal, 
81
observation, 
75-86
open, 
650
painful, 
358
 
, 
358-359
 
, 
359
hot and, 
632-633
menstrual symptoms, 
835
pathological signs, 
81-85
protruding, 
82
 
, 
83
 
, 
642-643
2532
pupils 
See
 
pupil(s)
quivering, 
644
red veins/membrane, 
645-646
scaly, 
643-644
sclera 
See
 
sclera colour
small intestine, 
78
sockets, 
85
 
, 
85
spirit and emotions, 
36
 
, 
80
staring and fixed, 
83
 
, 
123
 
, 
650
stomach and spleen, 
77
strabismus, 
83
 
, 
83
streaming, 
84
 
, 
84
 
, 
360
 
, 
360
 
, 
633-634
sunken, 
82-83
 
, 
643
symptoms and signs, 
627-652
system, 
79
 
, 
79-80
turning up, 
644
veins, 
plate 12.1
vision 
See
 
vision
 
eyelids
Eye System, 
79
 
, 
79-80
eyelids, 
78
 
, 
79
abnormal colour, 
83
 
, 
83-84
 
, 
637-638
area around, greenish/bluish complexion, 
55
boil on, 
639
dark, 
638
drooping, 
640
flapping, 
639
green, 
638
2533
loss of control, 
640
lower redness, 
641
nodules within, 
640-641
pain, 
639
pale, 
638
red, 
637-638
red grains inside, 
641
stye, 
637
swollen, 
84
 
, 
84
 
, 
638-639
 
See also
 
eye(s)
2534
F
face, 
301-309
acne 
See
 
acne
blushing, 
579
complexion colour 
See
 
complexion colours
eye/mouth deviation, 
60
 
, 
60
feeling heat of face/hot flushes, 
569-571
feeling of heat in, 
302
 
, 
302
feeling of numbness/tingling, 
303
 
, 
572
internal organs relationship, 
3
 
, 
3
interrogation, 
301-309
lines, 
71
 
, 
574
as microsystem, 
7-8
movements, 
60-61
observation, 
69-74
constitution of person, 
69
diagnostic signs, 
70-71
 
, 
71
reading, 
87
oedema, 
71
 
, 
572
pain in, 
302-303
 
, 
303
 
, 
303
 
, 
571-572
paralysis (Bell’s palsy), 
60-61
 
, 
573
 
, 
plate 4.1
redness and swelling, 
573
symptoms and signs, 
569-574
tics, 
61
 
, 
572-573
ulcers (below zygomatic arch), 
71
 
, 
574
warts, 
plate 21.52
 
See also
 
eye(s);
 
mouth;
 
philtrum
faeces 
See
 
stools
2535
fainting, 
296-297
 
, 
560-561
underlying patterns, 
297
falls, miscarriage, 
841
false spirit, 
34
Fan Guan Mai
 
, pulse, 
451
Fan Zao
 
(mental restlessness), 
794
fasciculation (muscle twitching), 
63
 
, 
714-715
fear, 
384-385
 
, 
425
 
, 
425
of cold, 
363
patterns, 
385
symptoms and signs, 
792-793
 
See also
 
anxiety
febrile diseases 
See
 
fever
feet
cold, 
344
 
, 
519
 
, 
520
 
, 
672
 
, 
694
hot, 
672-673
little finger correspondence, 
142
 
, 
142
oedema, 
345
 
, 
693-694
pain, 
697-698
painful, 
344-345
 
, 
345
palpation, 
519-520
soles of 
See
 
soles of feet
sweaty, 
778-779
toe ulcers, 
701
tremor, 
64-65
Fen Rou
 
, 
169
 
, 
169
Feng Tuan
 
, 
177
Feng Yin Zhen
 
, 
185
Feng Zhen
 
, 
180
fertility, 
406-408
case histories, 
406-408
2536
fetus
breech presentation, 
842
problems during pregnancy, 
841-842
slow growth, 
842
fetus Cold, 
1003
fetus Heat, 
867
 
, 
1003
fetus toxin, 
871
fever, 
361-377
 
, 
814-816
acute, 
814-815
closed eyes, 
650
contracted ears, 
584
convulsions, 
155
after chemotherapy, 
817
after childbirth, 
846-847
in cancer, 
816-817
in children, 
863-864
low-grade, 
864
chronic, 
374-375
 
, 
815-816
Blood deficiency, 
375
 
, 
815
Blood stasis, 
375
 
, 
815
Empty-Heat from Yin deficiency, 
374
 
, 
815
Qi deficiency, 
374-375
 
, 
815
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat, 
375
 
, 
815
Damp-Heat 
See
 
Damp-Heat
degrees of, 
369
 
, 
369
in exterior patterns, 
368
Four Levels
 
, 
373
 
, 
373
head tilted backwards, 
565
2537
Heat at Blood level, 
374
Heat at Nutritive-Qi level, 
374
Heat in Bright Yang -channel pattern, 
373
Heat in Bright Yang -organ pattern, 
374
Heat in the Lungs (Qi level), 
373
interior, 
372
 
, 
372-375
menstrual symptoms, 
833
origin, 
372
 
, 
372-373
pathology, 
368
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs (Qi level), 
373
purple gums, 
621
purple lips, 
622
red lips, 
621
with simultaneous cold feeling, 
367
 
, 
367-370
tidal, 
816
withered and brittle nails, 
690
 
See also
 
Heat
fibroadenoma, 
122
fibrocystic disease, 
122
Fine pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
finger(s), 
130-132
cocoon like, 
132
contraction of, 
63
 
, 
65
 
, 
130-131
 
, 
131
 
, 
686-687
cracked, 
132
 
, 
687-688
index 
See
 
index finger(s);
 
index finger creases (children)
little, 
142
 
, 
142
middle, 
141
 
, 
141
observation of, 
130-132
babies, 
1057-1058
2538
palpation, 
520
pulse taking 
See
 
pulse, method of taking
ring, 
141
 
, 
142
shriveled and wrinkled, 
132
 
, 
688
spoon-shaped, 
131
 
, 
131
 
, 
687
swollen, 
131-132
 
, 
132
 
, 
686
red and itching, 
785
symptoms/signs, 
686-688
thickened, 
132
 
, 
688
thin pointed, 
131
 
, 
131
 
, 
687
thumbs, 
140
 
, 
140
tuberculosis (TB), 
131
 
, 
131
 
See also
 
hands;
 
index finger(s);
 
index
finger creases (children);
 
nails
Fire
characteristics, 
951
Empty-Fire, 
951
 
, 
952
Full-Fire, 
951
 
, 
952
Metal insulting Fire, 
1009
not generating Earth, 
1008
pathogenic factors, 
951-952
Qi levels, 
956
Water overacting on Fire, 
1008
Wood not generating Fire, 
1007-1008
 
See also
 
Dry-Heat
Fire in Intestines, anal fissure, 
762
Fire injuring Yin, 
799
Fire insulting Water, 
1009
Fire overacting on Metal, 
1008
Fire Rampart, 
79
Fire types
2539
body odour, 
549
 
, 
550
 
, 
550
body shape, 
16-17
 
, 
17
face, 
plate 1.3
voice, 
542
 
, 
542
Firm pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
fissures
anal, 
762
skin, 
180
fistula, anal, 
762
Five Elements
body shape classification, 
11
 
, 
15-21
Earth insulting Wood, 
1009
Earth not generating Metal, 
1008
Earth overacting on Water, 
1008
Fire insulting Water, 
1009
Fire not generating Earth, 
1008
Fire overacting on Metal, 
1008
generating sequence patterns, 
1007-1008
insulting sequence patterns, 
1009
Metal insulting Fire, 
1009
Metal not generating Water, 
1008
Metal overacting on Wood, 
1008
overacting sequence patterns, 
1008
pattern identification, 
1007-1009
Water insulting Earth, 
1009
Water not generating Wood, 
1008
Water overacting on Fire, 
1008
Wood insulting Metal, 
1009
2540
Wood not generating Fire, 
1007-1008
Wood overacting on Earth, 
1008
 
see also individual elements
Five Flaccidities, 
869
Five-Palm Heat, 
376
 
, 
376
 
, 
817
Five Retardations, 
869
children’s development, 
413
five senses, internal organs and nine orifices relationship, 
2
 
, 
2
Five Stages of Life, 
417-418
adolescence, 
417
childhood, 
417
middle age, 
418
old age, 
418
young adulthood, 
417-418
Five Wheels, 
78-79
 
, 
79
flaccidity
limbs, 
154
 
, 
154
 
, 
338
 
, 
338
pores, 
172
flatulence, 
273
 
, 
743
floaters, 
358
 
, 
628
Floating pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
flushed cheeks, 
189
Fo Shou San
 
, 
1030
fontanelles
late closure in babies, 
70
 
, 
872
raised, 
871-872
sunken, 
871
food
allergies, 
264
aversion to, 
264
 
, 
721
cold, excess, 
427
2541
constantly picking, 
722
craving, 
722
 
See also
 
craving
interrogation, 
261-267
intolerance, 
264
pain, 
258
regurgitation 
See
 
regurgitation
sleepiness after eating, 
722-723
stagnation, accumulation disorder, 
869
swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
114
 
, 
726
 
See also
appetite;
 
digestive symptoms;
 
taste
Food-Essences, atrophy, 
153
Food-Phlegm, clinical manifestations, 
936-937
food poisoning
aversion to food, 
721
diarrhoea with vomiting, 
748
gnawing hunger, 
721
nausea, 
723
poor appetite, 
720
umbilical pain, 
739
vomiting, 
725
food retention
abdominal fullness, 
741
abdominal pain below xyphoid process, 
736
acupuncture, 
916
after childbirth, 
844
aversion to food, 
721
belching, 
717
clinical manifestations, 
916
2542
convulsions in children, 
871
crying in children, 
868
diarrhoea, 
748
in children, 
865
with vomiting, 
748
digestive symptoms, 
262-263
disturbed sleep, 
868
epigastric pain, 
738
fainting, 
560
fever after childbirth, 
847
foul breath, 
729
grinding teeth, 
616-617
headache, 
562
in Intestines, constipation, 
749
low-grade fever in children, 
864
pale eyelids, 
638
prescription, 
916
regurgitation of food, 
719
retching, 
725
sour regurgitation, 
718
sour taste, 
728
Spleen-Qi deficiency with, accumulation disorder, 
869
with Stomach-Heat in children, sweating on head, 
778
vomiting, 
725
 
, 
748
white membrane on pupil in children, 
648
foot 
See
 
feet
forearm
2543
connecting channels, 
526-527
diagnosis, 
517-518
organ correspondence, 
518
 
, 
518
palpation, 
176
 
, 
517-518
skin, 
176
 
See also
 
limbs
forehead
skin palpation, 
517
temperature, 
517
foul breath, 
111
 
, 
729
Four Levels, 
373
 
, 
373
 
, 
958
Blood level, 
957
clinical manifestations, 
958
Defensive Qi level, 
954-955
Latent Heat, 
958-962
Nutritive Qi level, 
956
pattern identification, 
939-952
 
, 
953-964
Qi level, 
955-956
relationship to
Six Stages, 
962
 
, 
963-964
Three Burners, 
941
 
, 
962
 
, 
963-964
summary of, 
957-958
 
, 
958
tongue appearance, 
958
four limbs 
See
 
limbs
frozen shoulder, 
656
Fu
 
, 
169
 
, 
169
 
, 
526
Fu Tu Dan
 
, 
1030-1031
Fu Zi Li Zhong Wan
 
, 
1031
Full-Cold, 
986-987
 
, 
987
bluish/greenish complexion, 
577
2544
characteristics, 
363
 
, 
363
vs
 
Empty-Cold, 
947
 
, 
988
internal, purple lips, 
622
pale philtrum, 
625
white/pale complexion, 
575
Full-Cold in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001-1002
acupuncture, 
1002
clinical manifestations, 
1001
prescription, 
1002
Full-Fire 
vs
 
Empty-Fire, 
951
 
, 
952
Full-Heat, 
985-986
 
, 
986
anal fistula, 
762
dry and cracked lips, 
622
dry skin, 
782
vs
 
Empty Heat, 
371
 
, 
987
red complexion, 
577
red dorsum of hands, 
681
red lips, 
621
red nails, 
691
red palate, 
625
redness inside lower eyelids, 
641
severe, dark sclera, 
636
Small Intestine, 
911
spontaneous sweating, 
775
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
 
See also
 
Heat
Full-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1000-1001
Full-Heat in Small Intestine, 
615
Full-Heat with Blood stasis, 
622
2545
Full Latent Heat, 
960
Full pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Full–Empty, 
988-991
fullness
digestive symptoms, 
262-263
vs
 
distension, 
511
 
, 
740-741
with pain, 
256
 
, 
327
 
, 
327
pain characteristics, 
259
symptoms and signs, 
735
 
, 
740-741
 
See also
 
distension (bloating)
furuncle 
See
 
boils
2546
G
gait, 
161
 
, 
695-696
festination, 
161
 
, 
695
shuffling, 
161
 
, 
696
staggering, 
161
 
, 
696
stepping, 
161
 
, 
696
unstable, 
161
 
, 
695-696
Gall-Bladder
channels, 
996
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
Damp-Heat patterns, 
917-918
Heat in 
See
 
Heat in Gall-Bladder
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
pattern identification, 
917-919
Phlegm, 
937
tongue coating distribution, 
223
 
, 
223
 
, 
plate 26.2
Gall-Bladder channel, 
996
abdomen, 
145
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
chest, 
143
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
ears relationship, 
105
 
, 
106
eyes relationship, 
76
 
, 
77
 
, 
77-78
neck, 
109
 
, 
109
palpation, 
536
 
, 
536
blood vessel, 
536
skin, 
536
2547
Gall-Bladder deficiency, 
918
acupuncture, 
918
clinical manifestations, 
918
excessive dreaming, 
809
fear/anxiety, 
793
insomnia, 
808
prescription, 
918
severe timidity, 
795
sleep disturbances, 
348
Gall-Bladder-Heat, 
918
acupuncture, 
918
 
, 
956
clinical manifestations, 
918
 
, 
955-956
prescription, 
918
 
, 
956
sleep talking, 
810
tiredness, 
286
Gall-Bladder-Heat pattern (Qi level of four levels), 
605
Gall-Bladder stagnation with Phlegm-Heat, 
918-919
acupuncture, 
918-919
clinical manifestations, 
918
prescription, 
919
Gan Cao Gan Jiang Tang
 
, 
1031
Gan Lu Xiao Du Dan
 
, 
1031
Gan Yi
 
, 
648
gastritis, hand lines, 
133
 
, 
133
Gate of Life, 
80
Gathering-Qi, 
127
 
, 
128
 
, 
512
GB-2 Tinghui, 
536
 
, 
536
GB-24 Riyue, 
522
GB-25 Jingmen, 
522
Ge
 
, 
169
 
, 
169
2548
Ge Gen Qin Lian Tang
 
, 
1031
Ge Xia Zhu Yu Tang
 
, 
1031
genitalia
channels influencing, 
149
 
, 
149-150
 
, 
150
female, inflammation, 
858-859
genital eczema (female), 
858
herpes simplex, 
188
male, 
765-774
cold, 
769
ejaculation 
See
 
ejaculation
penis 
See
 
penis
scrotum 
See
 
scrotum
testicles, 
737
observation, 
149-151
pubic hair 
See
 
pubic hair
thrush (candida), 
187
vagina 
see entries beginning
 
vaginal
vulva 
See
 
vulva
warts, 
plate 21.53
German measles, 
180
 
, 
180
Girdle Vessel 
(Dai Mai)
 
, 
1003-1004
abdominal pain, lateral-lower, 
740
acupuncture, 
1004
clinical manifestations, 
1003-1004
herbs, 
1004
pathology
skin marks on back, 
119
 
, 
706
stiffness of back like tight belt, 
657
2549
pathology (Damp-Heat), groin pain, 
698
prescription, 
1004
glaucoma, 
641
glue ear, 
865
goitre, 
110
 
, 
110
 
, 
315-316
 
, 
316
 
, 
604
Governing Vessel 
(Du Mai)
 
, 
997-998
acupuncture, 
997
back, 
115
 
, 
115
 
, 
116
clinical manifestations, 
997
genitalia, 
149
 
, 
149
 
, 
150
gums, 
99
heat in 
See
 
Heat
herbs, 
998
mouth, 
93-94
 
, 
94
neck, 
109
 
, 
109
nose flow, 
87
 
, 
88
 
, 
88
philtrum, 
101
greasy food, excess, 
427
greasy hair, 
73
 
, 
566-567
greasy skin, 
179
 
, 
781-782
Greater-Yang channels, headache, 
562
Greater Yang stage
channel patterns, 
965-966
organ patterns, 
966-967
pattern identification, 
965-967
Greater-Yin channels, headache, 
562
Greater Yin stage
acupuncture, 
967
clinical manifestations, 
967
2550
prescription, 
967
greying prematurely, 
73
 
, 
73
 
, 
565
grief, 
387-388
 
, 
424-425
 
, 
425
case history, 
387-388
patterns, 
388
Plum Stone Syndrome, 
314
pulse indication, 
452
 
, 
459
tiredness, 
283
groaning, 
542
 
, 
543
 
, 
822
groin pain, 
698
Gu Tai Jian
 
, 
1031
Gui Pi Tang
 
, 
1031
Gui Shen Wan
 
, 
1031
Gui Zhi Fu Ling Wan
 
, 
1032
Gui Zhi Tang
 
, 
1032
guilt, 
426-427
 
, 
427
gums, 
306-308
abnormal colour, 
101
 
, 
101
 
, 
620-621
bleeding, 
101
 
, 
307
 
, 
307
 
, 
619
channels influencing, 
99
 
, 
99
children, 
193
 
, 
194
inflamed, 
101
 
, 
307
 
, 
618-619
observation, 
100-101
oozing pus, 
101
 
, 
620
pale, 
620
problems, 
101
 
, 
101
purple, 
620-621
receding, 
101
 
, 
307-308
 
, 
308
 
, 
619-620
red, 
620
2551
signs, 
100
symptoms and signs, 
618-621
 
See also
 
teeth
Gun Tan Wan
 
, 
1032
gynaecological history, 
395
 
, 
396
 
, 
396-397
gynaecological problems, 
823-860
 
See also
 
menstruation, problem symptoms
gynaecomastia, 
145
 
, 
669-670
2552
H
H
2
 
-receptor antagonists, pulse, 
508
haemorrhoids, 
761-762
hair
body, 
176
 
See also
 
pubic hair
dandruff, 
73
 
, 
73
 
, 
567
development, 
71-72
dry and brittle, 
72-73
 
, 
73
 
, 
566
falling out 
See
 
hair loss
greasy, 
73
 
, 
566-567
observation of, 
69-74
premature greying, 
73
 
, 
73
 
, 
565
hair loss, 
72
 
, 
72
 
, 
565-566
alopecia, 
72
 
, 
72
 
, 
566
case histories, 
1020
 
, 
1022
halitosis, 
111
 
, 
729
hallucinations, visual, 
76
hand line(s), 
133-136
abnormal signs on, 
133
 
, 
133
cancer, 
136
 
, 
136
circulatory diseases, 
134
 
, 
134
coronory heart disease, 
134
 
, 
134
description of, 
133
digestive system diseases, 
133
 
, 
133
diseases indicated on, 
133-136
emotions, 
133
 
, 
133
head, 
133
 
, 
133
Jade Pillar, 
133
 
, 
133
 
, 
135
2553
life, 
133
 
, 
133
main, 
133
 
, 
133
reproductive system diseases, 
135
 
, 
135
respiratory diseases, 
134
 
, 
134
urinary system diseases, 
135
 
, 
135
hands
abnormal colour, 
129
alcoholics, 
130
cold, 
519
 
, 
520
 
, 
672
 
, 
680
coldness, 
342-343
 
, 
343
dorsum
muscle atrophy, 
130
 
, 
685-686
palm comparison, 
520
red, 
129
 
, 
681
fingers 
See
 
finger(s)
hot, 
672-673
 
, 
680-681
hotness, 
343
 
, 
343
itching, 
343
 
, 
343
 
, 
683
knuckles deformed, 
132
 
, 
132
 
, 
684
numbness/tingling, 
343
 
, 
343
 
, 
683
observation, 
129-136
oedema, 
343
 
, 
684
pain in, 
682-683
painful, 
342
 
, 
342
pale, 
129
 
, 
681
palms
dorsum comparison, 
520
2554
dry, cracked and peeling, 
132
 
, 
684-685
red, 
129
 
, 
681
sweaty, 
133
 
, 
681-682
 
, 
779
palpation, 
519-520
respiratory diseases, 
134
 
, 
134
sweating, 
778-779
symptoms and signs, 
680-686
thenar eminence
atrophy, 
130
 
, 
685
venules, 
130
 
, 
685
tinea (ringworm) 
See
 
tinea (ringworm)
tremor, 
64
 
, 
130
 
, 
130
 
, 
156
 
, 
684
tuberculosis (TB), 
134
warts, 
plate 21.51
Hao Qin Qing Dan Tang
 
, 
1032
Hasty pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
hatred, 
426
 
, 
426
HE-1 Jiquan, 
531
 
, 
531
 
, 
532
HE-7 Shenmen, 
531
 
, 
531
 
, 
532
head
body movements, 
59-60
brain noise, 
298
 
, 
564
constitution of patient, 
69
development, 
71-72
drooping, 
563-564
face 
See
 
face
fainting, 
560-561
feeling of
2555
cold in, 
298
 
, 
563
distension, 
297
 
, 
297
 
, 
562
dizziness, 
559-560
heat in, 
299
 
, 
299
 
, 
563
heaviness, 
297
 
, 
297
muzziness (fuzziness), 
297
 
, 
298
 
, 
563
skin numbness/tingling, 
299
 
, 
299
fontanelle closure delay, babies, 
70
hair on 
See
 
hair
headache, 
561-562
interrogation, 
287-299
leaning to one side, 
70
 
, 
564
neck rigidity, 
59-60
numbness, 
563
observation, 
69-74
signs, 
70
scalp 
See
 
scalp
sweaty, 
778
swelling, 
70
 
, 
564
symptoms and signs, 
559-569
thumbnail correspondence, 
140
 
, 
140
tilted backwards, 
70
 
, 
565
tremor, 
59
 
, 
70
 
, 
564
ulcers, 
70
 
, 
564-565
 
See also
 
scalp
Head, Damp-Heat, 
977-978
head line, 
133
 
, 
133
headache, 
288-294
 
, 
561-562
ameliorating/aggravating factors, 
289
2556
case histories, 
291-294
character of pain, 
288-289
classification, 
290
elderly, 
288
external origin, 
290
 
, 
291
hypertension, 
288
internal origin, 
289-291
 
, 
290
interrogation, 
237-238
 
, 
288-294
location, 
288
 
, 
289
menstrual symptoms, 
405
 
, 
832
migraine, case history, 
291-293
onset, 
288
patterns underlying, 
294
post-orgasm, 
394
premenstrual symptoms, 
405
time, 
288
health line, 
133
 
, 
133
hearing (listening), diagnosis by, 
541-548
belching, 
546
 
, 
546
breathing, 
544-545
 
See also
 
breathing
coughing and sneezing, 
545-546
 
, 
546
crying in babies, 
544
hiccup, 
546
 
, 
546
speech 
See
 
speech/talking
voice 
See
 
voice
vomiting, 
547
 
, 
547
Heart
apical pulse palpation, 
512
 
, 
512
2557
combined patterns, 
883
feeling vexed 
(Xin Zhong Ao Nong)
 
, 
665-666
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat,
insomnia, 
808
left front pulse position, 
500
 
, 
500-501
 
, 
501
lunula correspondence, 
140
palpitations under, 
666-667
pathology, spots on back, 
118
pattern identification, 
879-883
Phlegm-Fire harassing the Heart, 
882
insomnia, 
808
Phlegm-Heat in 
See
 
Phlegm-Heat
Phlegm-Heat in the Heart, 
1016-1017
Phlegm misting Heart, 
937
problems, pulse diagnosis, 
459-460
Qi deficiency of Spleen and Heart with floating Yang,
hyperactivity, 
804
sexual symptoms, 
391
skin relationship, 
173
stuffiness feeling under, 
666
Turbid Dampness surrounding the Heart, 
883
Turbid Phlegm in the Heart, 
803
voice influence, 
542
Water overflowing to the Heart, 
883
Yang deficiency of Heart and Lungs, feeling of cold, 
814
Heart- and Gall-Bladder-Qi deficiency, 
800
Heart- and Kidney-Yang deficiency, 
578
Heart- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing
2558
to Heart, pulsation of carotid artery, 
655
heartbeat displaced upwards, 
667-668
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
amenorrhoea, 
829
cataract, 
651
insomnia, 
808
itching tongue, 
613
menopausal syndrome, 
856
tinnitus, 
581
upper teeth moist, lower teeth dry, 
618
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
anxiety, 
800
depression, 
798
hot hands and feet, 
673
nocturnal emissions, 
767
Heart- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Heart Empty-Heat
inappropriate laughter, 
795
insomnia, 
808
libido, lack of in women, 
860
upper teeth moist, lower teeth dry, 
618
Heart- and Liver-Blood deficiency, 
898
acupuncture, 
898
case history, 
1015
clinical manifestations, 
898
post-natal depression, 
847
prescription, 
898
Heart- and Liver-Fire
insomnia during menstruation, 
835
2559
premature greying, 
565
premenstrual tension, 
831
sticky menstrual blood, 
826
Heart- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Phlegm with goitre, 
604
post-natal depression/psychosis, 
847
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of Gathering-Qi), 
903-904
acupuncture, 
904
clinical manifestations, 
903-904
prescription, 
904
sadness, 
792
tinnitus, 
582
Heart- and Lung-Yang deficiency, 
363
Heart- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
amenorrhoea, 
829
depression, 
798
depression and manic behaviour, 
799
insomnia during menstruation, 
835
irregular periods, 
827
lack of libido in men, 
766
schizophrenia, 
802
severe timidity, 
795
tiredness/dizziness after ejaculation, 
768
Heart- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
propensity to worry, 
791-792
severe timidity, 
795
sighing, 
670
sweating on chest, 
778
2560
vomiting of blood, 
725-726
Heart- and Spleen-Yang deficiency
impotence, 
765
premature ejaculation, 
766-767
Heart and Gall-Bladder deficiency
excessive dreaming, 
809
startled easily, 
793
Heart-Blood deficiency, 
365
 
, 
880
acupuncture, 
880
anxiety, 
799
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
case history, 
1014
chest symptoms, 
322
clinical manifestations, 
880
cold hands, 
680
coldness, 
364
concentration difficulties, 
804
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
depression, 
797-798
difficulty in finding words, 
822
fainting, 
560
feeling of cold, 
814
hot and painful eyes, 
633
insomnia, 
807
irritability, 
801
lack of libido in men, 
766
numbness of the tongue, 
614
pale hands, 
681
2561
prescription, 
880
propensity to worry, 
792
sadness, 
792
sleep talking, 
810
slurred speech, 
821
startled easily, 
793
stuttering, 
822
tinnitus, 
582
visual acuity decreased, 
630
Heart-Blood stasis, 
882
acupuncture, 
882
anxiety, 
800
chest pain, 
663
clinical manifestations, 
882
 
, 
930
depression, 
798
heartbeat below xyphoid process, 
668
irritability, 
801
poor memory, 
804
post-natal depression/psychosis, 
847
prescription, 
882
reddish-purple nose, 
591
Heart channels, 
994
abdomen, 
145
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
chest, 
143
 
, 
143
eyes relationship, 
75
 
, 
77
mouth relationship, 
94
 
, 
94
palpation, 
531
 
, 
531-532
2562
blood vessel, 
531
skin, 
531-532
Heart cracks, 
36
 
, 
37
 
, 
217
 
, 
217-218
 
, 
plate 25.6,
 
, 
plate 25.7
Heart deficiency
constitutional weakness, 
866
crying in children, 
868
Heart Empty-Heat, excess joy, 
794
Heart-Fire
anxiety, 
799-800
in pregnancy, 
840
bitter taste, 
727
blood in urine, 
758
 
, 
839
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
disturbed sleep, 
868
dryness and redness of skin on lower back, 
706
excess joy, 
794
excessive dreaming, 
808
eye discharge, 
634
Heart feeling vexed, 
665
heat feeling in chest, 
665
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
569-570
hot and painful eyes, 
632
hot hands, 
680
inappropriate laughter, 
795
insomnia, 
808
irritability, 
801
itching eyes, 
631
itching tongue, 
613
2563
loud voice, 
819
mental restlessness, 
794
morning sickness, 
837
mouth open, 
612
mouth ulcers, 
610
nocturnal emissions, 
767
pain and itching of penis, 
771
painful tongue, 
613
painful urination, 
839
premenstrual tension, 
831
protruding eyeball, 
642
rash in axillae, 
785
red eye corners, 
636
red helix, 
586
red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
red sclera, 
635
red veins in eyes, 
645
redness on throat, 
607
sleep talking, 
810
staring, fixed eyes, 
650
startled easily, 
793
streaming eyes, 
633
stuttering, 
822
sweating in axillae, 
779
sweaty palms, 
682
swollen nose, 
596
thirst, 
731
2564
tongue ulcers, 
614
urination painful, 
754
urticaria, 
784
Heart-Fire blazing, 
881-882
acupuncture, 
882
clinical manifestations, 
881-882
prescription, 
882
Heart-Heat
blood vessels distended on ear, 
586
blushing, 
579
crying in babies, 
868
crying in children, 
868
Heart-Qi, reflection of, pulse diagnosis, 
445
 
, 
459
Heart-Qi and Heart-Blood deficiency, 
880
acupuncture, 
880
clinical manifestations, 
880
prescription, 
880
Heart-Qi and Heart-Yin deficiency, 
881
Heart-Qi deficiency
acupuncture, 
879
clinical manifestations, 
879
heartbeat below xyphoid process, 
668
lack of libido (female), 
860
libido, lack of in women, 
860
morning sickness, 
837
mouth open, 
612
prescription, 
879
sweating of the palms, 
779
2565
sweaty palms, 
682
Heart-Qi deficiency with Blood stasis, 
669
Heart-Qi deficiency with Heart-Blood stasis
heartbeat displaced downwards, 
667
heartbeat displaced to the right, 
668
Heart-Qi stagnation, 
881
abdominal pain (area below xyphoid process), 
736
acupuncture, 
881
clinical manifestations, 
881
nausea, 
723-724
prescription, 
881
Heart Vessel Obstruction, 
882-883
acupuncture, 
883
clinical manifestations, 
882-883
prescription, 
883
Heart-Yang deficiency
acupuncture, 
879
chest pain, 
663
clinical manifestations, 
879
cold hands, 
680
depression, 
798
lack of libido in men, 
766
pain in hands, 
682
pale hands, 
681
palpitations under the Heart, 
667
patterns, 
879-880
prescription, 
879
sweating of the palms, 
779
2566
sweaty palms, 
682
swollen scrotum, 
770
Heart-Yang deficiency with Phlegm, 
880
acupuncture, 
880
chest pain, 
663
clinical manifestations, 
880
oppression feeling in chest, 
664
prescription, 
880
Heart-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing, muscle twitching, 
715
Heart-Yin and Heart-Yang deficiency, 
881
acupuncture, 
881
clinical manifestations, 
881
prescription, 
881
Heart-Yin deficiency
acupuncture, 
880
anxiety, 
799
clinical manifestations, 
880
dry eyes, 
632
fainting, 
560
insomnia, 
807
pain in hands, 
683
patterns, 
880-881
prescription, 
880
propensity to worry, 
792
startled easily, 
793
sweaty palms, 
682
 
, 
779
thirst, 
732
Heart-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
2567
acupuncture, 
881
anxiety, 
799
blushing, 
579
clinical manifestations, 
881
excessive dreaming, 
809
Heart feeling vexed, 
665
heat feeling in chest, 
665
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hot hands, 
680
irritability, 
802
itching tongue, 
613
painful tongue, 
613-614
palpitations under the Heart, 
667
prescription, 
881
propensity to worry, 
792
red eye corners, 
636
red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
red veins in eyes, 
645
redness on throat, 
607
scaly eyeballs, 
643-644
sleep talking, 
810
sweating in axillae, 
779
swollen nose, 
596
thirst, 
732
tongue ulcers, 
614-615
Heartbeat
below xyphoid process, 
128
 
, 
668
2568
displacement
left and right, 
128
 
, 
668
upwards and downwards, 
128
 
, 
667-668
intercostal space, 
127
 
, 
128
observation, 
127-128
pulsation of Xu Li, 
127-128
 
, 
512
 
See also
 
pulse
Heat
acute interior, dry and white teeth, 
617
Blood-Heat 
See
 
Blood-Heat
Blood level (Four Levels)
purple nails, 
692
sudden blindness, 
631
Blood stasis from 
See
 
Blood stasis
climate, 
428
contradictory feelings of Cold/Heat, 
817-818
Damp-Heat 
See
 
Damp-Heat
disturbed sleep, 
868
with Dryness, lines on the face, 
574
Empty-Heat 
See
 
Empty-Heat
face, 
301
fetus Heat, 
1003
Five-Palm Heat, 
817
Full 
See
 
Full-Heat
Full-Heat 
See
 
Full-Heat
generating Wind 
See
 
Wind
injuring Body Fluids, indented nails, 
689
Latent 
See
 
Latent Heat
2569
in Lung 
See
 
Lung-Heat
Nutritive-Qi level, limb flaccidity, 
675
pain characteristics, 
259
Phlegm-Heat 
See
 
Phlegm-Heat
 
fever;
 
Wind-Heat;
 
specific organs
heat, feeling of, 
361-377
alternating with cold, 
370-371
 
, 
376-377
internal causes, 
371-372
 
See also
 
fever
Heat - chronic, dark helix, 
585
Heat at Blood level, 
374
fever in children, 
864
Heat at Defensive-Qi level, 
869-870
Heat at Ying level, 
863-864
Heat generating Wind 
See
 
Wind
Heat in Bladder
incontinence of urine, 
757
urine retention in infants, 
867
Heat in Bright Yang
abdominal fullness, 
741
acupuncture, 
970
channel pattern, 
373
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
970
constipation, 
748-749
fever in children, 
863-864
organ pattern, 
374
prescription, 
970
umbilical pain, 
739
Heat in Exterior, Cold in Interior, 
988
Heat in Gall-Bladder, 
979
blocked nose, 
592
2570
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
depression, 
798
swollen ears, 
584
Heat in Governing Vessel, ulcers on the scalp, 
569
Heat in Heart and Small Intestine, dark urine, 
753
Heat in Intestines
blood in stools, 
751
dark urine, 
754
straining in defecation, 
752
Heat in Kidneys
acupuncture, 
970
clinical manifestations, 
970
prescription, 
970
Heat in Large Intestine
cold sores, 
611
toothache, 
615
Heat in Lesser-Yang channels, red helix, 
586
Heat in Liver and Gall-Bladder
dry throat, 
605
sores on ear, 
584
vomiting, 
724
warts on ear, 
585
Heat in Liver and Stomach, neck ulcers, 
789
Heat in Lung channel, red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
Heat in Lungs, 
373
Heat in Lungs (Qi level), 
969-970
acupuncture, 
969
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
969
prescription, 
969-970
Heat in Lungs and Spleen
2571
drooping red eye membrane, 
646
eyelid pain, 
639
stye on eyelids, 
637
Heat in Lungs and Stomach
acne, 
569
 
, 
784
eyelid pain, 
639
redness and swelling of pharynx, 
602
rosacea, 
785
stye on eyelids, 
637
white purulent spots in throat, 
606-607
Heat in Lungs with Dryness, 
978
Heat in Nutritive-Qi level, 
374
acupuncture, 
956
 
, 
970
clinical manifestations, 
956
 
, 
970
fever in cancer, 
816
prescription, 
956
 
, 
970
Heat in Pericardium
acupuncture, 
956
 
, 
970
clinical manifestations, 
956
 
, 
970
delirious speech, 
822
prescription, 
956
Heat in Spleen and Heart
tongue/palate white spots, 
872
toothache, 
615
Heat in Stomach, 
978-979
Heat in Stomach and Intestines, redness and erosion of pharynx, 
603
Heat in Stomach and Kidneys, plaque, 
617
Heat in Stomach and Spleen
dribbling from mouth, 
612
2572
dry throat, 
605
red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
red ring around pupil, 
648
sweet taste, 
727
yellow fluid between iris and pupil, 
648
Heat stagnating in Interior
cold hands and feet, 
672
feeling of cold, 
814
white/pale complexion, 
576
Heat victorious stirring Wind (Blood level), limb convulsions, 
678
Heaven Rampart, 
79
heaviness, 
949
Hei Dan
 
, 
175
Hei Shen San
 
, 
1032
helix 
See
 
ear(s)
hemiplegia, 
64
 
, 
155
 
, 
711-712
 
See also
 
paralysis
Hemp Rash, 
180
herbs
Yang Heel Vessel 
(Yang Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Heel Vessel 
(Yin Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Linking Vessel 
(Yin Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
heredity, 
418-419
causes of disease, 
416
Weak-Heart constitution, 
419
Weak-Kidney constitution, 
420
Weak-Liver constitution, 
419-420
Weak-Lung constitution, 
419
Weak-Spleen constitution, 
419
herpes simplex, 
plate 21.49
2573
pathology and diagnosis, 
188
 
, 
188
symptoms and signs, 
785-786
types, 
188
 
See also
 
cold sores
herpes zoster (shingles), 
plate 21.50
occurrence, 
188
pathology and diagnosis, 
188-189
 
, 
189
hiccup, 
546
 
, 
546
 
, 
719
hip pain, 
343-344
 
, 
697
historical aspects, 
1051-1060
channel diagnosis, 
1056-1058
pulse diagnosis, 
1051-1055
tongue diagnosis, 
1058-1059
hot conditions, 
985-988
 
See also
 
Heat
hot flushes (menopausal), 
301
 
, 
302
 
, 
401
 
, 
569-571
hot food, excess, 
427
hot hands, 
343
 
, 
343
Hua Chong Wan
 
, 
1032
Hua Gan Jian
 
, 
1032
Huang Lian E Jiao Tang
 
, 
1032
Huang Qi Jian Zhong Tang
 
, 
1032
Hun
 
(Ethereal Soul) 
See
 
Ethereal Soul 
(Hun)
hunger
but no appetite, 
265
 
, 
721
case history, 
722
excessive, 
264
 
, 
720
gnawing, 
721-722
poor appetite, 
719-720
 
See also
 
appetite
Huo Po Xia Ling Tang
 
, 
1033
Huo Xiang Zheng Qi San
 
, 
1033
Hurried pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
2574
hyperactivity, 
804-805
hyperopia, 
629-630
hypertension
hand lines, 
134
 
, 
134
headache, 
288
hypnotics, pulse, 
507
hypochondrial pain, 
331-332
 
, 
332
 
, 
738
after childbirth, 
844-845
case history, 
331
 
, 
332
hypochondrium, 
145
 
, 
145
areas and palpation, 
514
 
, 
514
lumps, 
147
 
, 
744
Phlegm-Fluids, 
668
 
, 
738
 
, 
937
 
See also
 
abdomen
2575
I
ichtyosis, 
179
identification of patterns 
See
 
pattern identification
images 
(Xiang)
 
, 
1
immunizations
causes of disease, 
429
children, 
412
impotence 
See
 
erectile dysfunction
incoherent speech, 
821
incontinence
stools, 
750
urine, 
757
index finger(s), 
140
 
, 
141
analysis (children), 
194-199
 
See also
 
index finger creases (children)
babies, 
1057-1058
creases 
See
 
index finger creases (children)
gates (children), 
194
 
, 
194
 
See also
 
finger(s)
index finger creases (children), 
195-199
bow facing inside, 
196
 
, 
196
bow facing outside, 
196
 
, 
197
branching out, 
199
 
, 
199
curved, 
197
 
, 
198
diagonal, 
197
 
, 
197
fish-bone, 
198
 
, 
198
flowing pearl, 
195
 
, 
196
hook, 
197
 
, 
198
long pearl, 
195
 
, 
196
long vertical, 
197
 
, 
197
2576
needle, 
197
 
, 
197
s-shaped, 
198
 
, 
198
snake going away, 
195
 
, 
196
snake returning, 
195-196
 
, 
196
spear, 
197
 
, 
197
three, 
197-198
 
, 
198
three squiggly, 
199
 
, 
199
worm, 
197
 
, 
198
 
See also
 
finger(s)
infants 
See
 
babies;
 
children
infertility (female), 
855-856
case histories, 
407-408
 
, 
1013-1015
 
, 
1017-1015
inflammation
in children, 
869-870
female genitalia, 
858-859
insomnia, 
348
 
, 
348-349
 
, 
349
 
, 
807-808
menstrual symptom, 
835
patterns, 
350
premenstrual symptoms, 
405
 
, 
835
insulin, effect on pulse, 
508
interior, Eight Principles, 
984-985
Intermittent pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
internal organs
Dampness, 
949-950
 
, 
950
facial areas relationship, 
3
five tissues relationship, 
3-4
 
, 
4
nine orifices and five senses relationship, 
2
 
, 
2
pattern identification, 
877-926
 
see also individual organs
interrogation, 
235
10 traditional questions, 
249-250
2577
limitations, 
249
16 questions, 
250-251
abdomen, 
326-335
asking the right questions, 
237-238
avoiding pitfalls, 
239-240
body, 
317-319
chest, 
321-326
children’s symptoms, 
411-413
diagnosis by, 
233-251
ears, 
355-357
emotional state, 
250
energy levels, 
250
eyes, 
357-360
face, 
301-309
feeling of cold, heat and fever, 
361-377
food and taste, 
261-267
head, 
287-299
integration with observation, 
242
limbs, 
337-345
mental–emotional symptoms, 
379-389
neck, 
311-316
nose, 
303-306
pain, 
253-260
patient expressions, 
239
pattern identification, 
242
 
, 
242
procedure, 
240-241
pulse diagnosis integration, 
243-248
2578
sexual life, 
250
sexual symptoms, 
391-394
sleep disturbances, 
347-350
stools and urine, 
261-267
styles, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
236-237
sweating, 
351-354
symptom timescales, 
241
terminology, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
238-239
 
, 
255
thirst and drink, 
277-279
throat, 
311-316
tiredness, 
281-286
tongue diagnosis integration, 
243-248
trigger events, 
241
women’s symptoms, 
395-409
 
See also
 
questions
intestinal gas, 
551
intestinal worms 
See
 
worm infestation
Intestine(s)
deficient and Cold, abdominal pain, 
739
Dry-Heat (Fire), 
955
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
large 
See
 
Large Intestine
Phlegm-Fluids, 
937
small 
See
 
Small Intestine
invasion
absence of sweating, 
780
acute cough, 
659
cold upper back, 
656
contraction of limbs, 
677
2579
flapping eyelids, 
639
headache, 
291
 
, 
562
lower backache, 
704
nasal voice, 
820
numbness/tingling in limbs, 
673
runny nose, 
592
stiff neck, 
653
streaming eyes, 
634
upper backache, 
656
white/pale complexion, 
576
irregular pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
irritability, 
385-386
patient expressions, 
386
patterns, 
385
symptoms and signs, 
800-802
 
See also
 
anger;
 
mental-emotional
symptoms
itching, 
319
 
, 
319
 
, 
713
anus, 
761
ears, 
357
 
, 
357
 
, 
582
eyes, 
359
 
, 
359
 
, 
631
fingers, 
785
hands, 
343
 
, 
343
 
, 
683
mouth, 
611
nose, 
304
 
, 
304
 
, 
593
penis, 
771
scalp, 
287
 
, 
567
scrotum, 
771
throat, 
313
 
, 
605
2580
tongue, 
613
vaginal, 
858
 
See also
 
urticaria
2581
J
Jade Pillar, 
133
 
, 
133
 
, 
135
 
See also
 
hand line(s)
jaundice, 
174
 
, 
175
children, 
870
complexion colours, 
53-54
fetus toxin, 
871
signs, 
714
Ji
masses, 
146
 
, 
147
 
, 
511
skin, 
169
 
, 
169
Ji Ju
 
, 
146
 
, 
147
 
, 
511
Ji Yin Jian
 
, 
1034
Jian Ling Tang
 
, 
1033
Jie Du Huo Xue Tang
 
, 
1033
Jin Gui Shen Qi Wan
 
, 
1033
Jin Jia Wan
 
, 
1048
Jin Ling Zi San
 
, 
1033
Jin Suo Gu Jing Wan
 
, 
1033
Jing Fang Si Wu Tang
 
, 
1033
Jing Jin
 
See
 
Muscle channels
Jing Mai
 
, 
525
jogging, slow pulse, 
471-472
joint(s)
contraction, 
64
pain in, 
254
 
, 
318
 
, 
318
 
, 
710
after childbirth, 
844
pain in, case histories
generalized joint pain, 
340
tongue/pulse diagnosis, 
243
2582
joy, 
423
 
, 
423
excess, 
388
 
, 
389
 
, 
794
 
See also
 
mania
Ju
 
, 
146
 
, 
147
 
, 
511
Ju He Wan
 
, 
1034
Ju Pi Zhu Ru Tang
 
, 
1034
Jue
 
, 
539
2583
K
KI-3 Taixi, 
533-534
 
, 
534
Kidney(s)
abdominal reflection of state, 
146
 
, 
515
Body Fluid deficiency, 
935
channels, 
995
combined patterns, 
908-910
eyes relationship, 
77
failing to receive Qi, 
908
gums relationship, 
99
lunula correspondence, 
140
pathology, spots on back, 
118
pattern identification, 
905-910
combined patterns, 
908-910
Phlegm, 
937
pulse position
left rear, 
502
 
, 
502-503
 
, 
503
right rear, 
506
 
, 
506
skin relationship, 
172
 
, 
172-173
 
, 
173
voice influence, 
541
 
, 
542
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency, 
908-909
acupuncture, 
909
amenorrhoea, 
829
atrophy of legs, 
694
bleeding on intercourse, 
859-860
breast lumps, 
851
cataract, 
651
2584
clinical manifestations, 
908-909
constipation, 
749
contraction of limbs, 
677
dark sclera, 
636
distended abdominal veins, 
743
dyspareunia, 
859
early (short cycle) periods, 
827
heartbeat displaced downwards, 
667
heavy periods, 
828
impotence, 
765-766
incontinence of urine, 
757
kyphosis, 
708
leg weakness, 
699
leukoplakia, 
859
limb atrophy, 
674-675
limb paralysis, 
677
limb rigidity, 
676
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind, 
894
lordosis, 
707
myopia, 
629
night vision decreased, 
630
painful periods, 
829
paralysis, 
710
of legs, 
695
premenstrual tension, 
832
prescription, 
909
restless legs, 
700
2585
small breasts, 
852
staggering gait, 
696
straining in defecation, 
752
ulcers on lower leg, 
701
vaginal itching, 
858
watery menstrual blood, 
826
weak knees, 
699
white specks on sclera, 
647
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency and Liver-Blood deficiency, giving rise to Liver-Wind,
limb convulsions, 
678
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Blood deficiency, bleeding between iris and pupil,
649
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Blood Empty-Heat, heavy periods, 
828
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat, swollen fingers, 
686
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
909
anxiety in pregnancy, 
840
blood in stools, 
751
convulsions in children, 
871
distension feeling in eyes, 
642
fever during menstruation, 
833
five-colour vaginal discharge, 
857
menstrual bleeding returning after menopause, 
830
mid-cycle menstrual bleeding, 
829
psoriasis, 
783
red sclera, 
635
red-white vaginal discharge, 
857
streaming eyes, 
633
ulcers on penis, 
773
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with internal Wind
2586
gait festination, 
695
limb paralysis, 
677
paralysis, 
710
stepping gait, 
696
unstable gait, 
695-696
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Liver-Qi stagnation, premenstrual breast
distension, 
832
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising
dizziness
during menstruation, 
835
in pregnancy, 
840
hyperactivity, 
804
menopausal syndrome, 
856
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency with Wind-Phlegm in channels, shuffling gait, 
696
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency, 
909
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
909-910
acupuncture, 
910
clinical manifestations, 
909-910
prescription, 
910
Kidney- and Spleen-Yang deficiency, 
910
acupuncture, 
910
clinical manifestations, 
910
prescription, 
910
Kidney- Yin deficiency and Kidney-Yang deficiency 
See
 
Kidney-Yang and Kidney- Yin
deficiency
Kidney and Heart not harmonized (Kidney- and Heart-Yin deficiency with Heart
Empty-Heat), 
909
Kidney channel
abdomen, 
145
gums, 
99
2587
palpation, 
533-534
 
, 
534
blood vessel, 
533
skin, 
534
pathology in pregnancy, hoarse voice, 
820
Kidney deficiency
chronic diarrhoea, 
271
coccyx pain, 
705
concentration difficulties, 
804
constitutional, 
869
constitutional weakness, 
867
dark eyelids, 
638
dark nails, 
692
deafness, 
356-357
difficulty in finding words, 
822
dizziness, 
559
after childbirth, 
846
ears, 
355
eyeball turning up, 
644
Five Flaccidities, 
869
flapping of nostrils, 
870
flat philtrum, 
625
hair falling out, 
565-566
headache, 
291
 
, 
562
hot and painful eyes, 
633
impotence, 
392
 
, 
392
infertility (female), 
855
irregular periods, 
827
2588
joint pain, 
710
knee pain, 
697
late (long cycle) periods, 
827
loose teeth, 
616
lower backache, 
318
miscarriage, 
841
pain in foot, 
697
poor memory, 
803
sexual symptoms, 
391
stiff neck, 
653
tinnitus, 
581
tooth cavities, 
616
Kidney deficiency with Blood stasis, scoliosis, 
707
Kidney deficiency with Dampness
pain in soles of feet, 
698
ulcers on penis, 
773
Kidney deficiency with Phlegm, boils on BL-23 Shenshu (back), 
706
Kidney-Essence, tongue spirit, 
209
Kidney-Essence deficiency
atrophy of legs, 
695
children, kyphosis, 
708
dark complexion, 
578
deviated neck, 
654
elderly, kyphosis, 
708
hyperopia, 
629
impotence, 
766
late closure of fontanelles, 
872
limb atrophy, 
674-675
2589
lordosis, 
707
loss of pubic hair, 
773
 
, 
860
nocturnal emissions, 
767
premature greying, 
565
quivering eyeball, 
644
red veins in eyes, 
645
scoliosis, 
707
strabismus, 
628-629
thin and brittle nails, 
689
Kidney-Essence deficiency with weakness of Governing Vessel, spine bent forward, 
707-
708
Kidney-Qi deficiency, 
905
acupuncture, 
905
clinical manifestations, 
905
failing to receive Qi, 
908
lochia, 
843
prescription, 
905
retention of placenta, 
843
sweating after childbirth, 
846
urinary difficulty after childbirth, 
845
vaginal bleeding, after childbirth, 
845
Kidney-Qi deficient and sinking
prolapse of uterus, 
859
urine retention, 
839
Kidney-Qi not firm, 
907-908
acupuncture, 
908
clinical manifestations, 
907-908
cold-watery sperm, 
768
2590
dribbling of urine, 
756
ejaculation during sleep, 
767
incontinence of urine, 
757
premature ejaculation, 
766
prescription, 
908
prolapse of vagina, 
859
sperm in urine, 
759
Kidney-Yang and Kidney- Yin deficiency
Kidney- Yin deficiency predominant, 
907
patterns, 
907
Kidney-Yang deficiency, 
905-906
acupuncture, 
905-906
anal prolapse, 
762
clinical manifestations, 
905
cold and heaviness in lower back, 
704
cold feet, 
694
coldness, 
364
constipation, 
749
after childbirth, 
845
in pregnancy, 
839
dark scrotum, 
771
depression, 
797
diarrhoea, 
747
during menstruation, 
834
dilated pupils, 
649
fear/anxiety, 
793
feeling of cold in abdomen, 
742
frequent urination, 
756
2591
habitual miscarriage, 
842
impotence, 
392
 
, 
392
 
, 
765
lack of libido
female, 
860
male, 
766
leg weakness, 
699
leukoplakia, 
859
libido, lack of in women, 
860
limb oedema, 
675
limb weakness, 
674
loose scrotum, 
769
lower back and knee weakness, 
704
lower backache, 
703
menopausal syndrome, 
856
nighttime urination, 
758
nocturnal enuresis, 
757
 
, 
867
obesity, 
319
oedema
of abdomen, 
745
after childbirth, 
846
of body, 
713
of feet, 
693
in pregnancy, 
838
pain in soles of feet, 
698
pale and abundant urine, 
754
paralysis, 
710
patterns, 
905-906
2592
Peyronie’s disease, 
772
premenstrual constipation, 
834
prescription, 
906
regurgitation of food, 
719
runny nose, 
592
salty taste, 
727
scanty and difficult urination, 
755
scanty periods, 
828
severe, dark complexion, 
578
severe timidity, 
795
with simultaneous Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
376
sneezing, 
591
soft and withered penis, 
771-772
soft neck, 
654
somnolence, 
810
stiff knees, 
699
stiffness of lower back, 
705
streaming eyes, 
633
sunken chest, 
669
thigh pain, 
697
tiredness/dizziness after ejaculation, 
768
turbid urine, 
754
urination difficult, 
756
vaginal bleeding, 
838
weak knees, 
698
weak voice, 
820
white purulent spots in throat, 
607
2593
white vaginal discharge, 
857
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Dampness
heaviness feeling in legs, 
700
heaviness feeling in limbs, 
674
sciatica, 
704
Kidney-Yang deficiency with deficiency of Original Qi, fainting, 
560
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold, purple lips, 
621-622
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Heart-Heat, 
905-906
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Blood deficiency, premenstrual breast distension, 
833
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Blood stasis, abdominal masses, 
744
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
breathlessness, 
662
wheezing, 
663
Kidney-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing, 
906
to Heart, palpitations, 
666
 
, 
667
increased salivation, 
733
to Lungs, breathlessness, 
662
Kidney-Yang rising, blurred vision and floaters, 
628
Kidney-Yin and Kidney-Yang deficiency
menopausal syndrome, 
856
protruding eyeball, 
643
Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
906
acupuncture, 
906
anxiety, 
800
atrophy of muscles in dorsum of hands, 
685
atrophy of thenar eminence, 
685
bluish-greenish sclera, 
635
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
clinical manifestations, 
906
2594
congenital, 
872
long penis in children, 
872
constipation
after childbirth, 
845
in pregnancy, 
839
contracted ears, 
584
corneal opacity, 
647
dry and brittle hair, 
566
dry and dull teeth, 
617
dry eyes, 
632
dry scalp, 
568
dry skin, 
782
dry throat, 
605
fear/anxiety, 
793
frequent urination, 
756
habitual miscarriage, 
842
helix dry and contracted, 
584
irritability, 
801
leg weakness, 
699
limb flaccidity, 
675
lower back and knee weakness, 
705
lower backache, 
703
menopausal syndrome, 
856
nocturnal enuresis, 
758
obstruction feeling in throat, 
607
pain in soles of feet, 
698
patterns, 
906-907
2595
plaque, 
617
prescription, 
906
salty taste, 
727
scanty and difficult urination, 
755
scanty periods, 
828
scarring after corneal opacity, 
647
with simultaneous Kidney-Yang deficiency, 
376
soft and withered penis, 
771
sweating after childbirth, 
846
thirst, 
732
tiredness/dizziness after ejaculation, 
768
turbid urine, 
754
visual acuity decreased, 
630
voice loss, 
840
withered and brittle nails, 
690
yellow and dry teeth, 
618
Kidney-Yin deficiency, Empty Heat blazing, 
906-907
acupuncture, 
907
clinical manifestations, 
906-907
prescription, 
907
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Bladder-Heat, urinary difficulty after childbirth, 
845
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Blood Empty-Heat, infertility (female), 
856
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
906
acupuncture, 
906
bleeding from ears, 
583
bleeding gums, 
619
blood in sperm, 
768
blood in urine, 
758
 
, 
839
2596
burning sensations in soles of feet, 
701
clinical manifestations, 
906
concha swelling and redness, 
586-587
dark urine, 
753
dilated pupils, 
649
dry and dull teeth, 
617
ear discharge, 
583
ecchymosis under conjunctiva, 
644-645
excessive pubic hair, 
774
 
, 
860
feeling of heat in head, 
299
glaucoma, 
641
grey teeth, 
618
heat of head, 
563
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hyperopia, 
629
inability to ejaculate, 
767-768
irritability, 
801-802
itching ears, 
582
itching scrotum, 
771
lochia, 
844
loose teeth, 
616
mouth ulcers during menstruation, 
834
nosebleed, 
594
pain and itching of penis, 
771
painful urination, 
839
premature greying, 
565
prescription, 
906
2597
priapism, 
768-769
receding gums, 
619-620
red eye corners, 
637
red helix, 
586
red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
redness of pharynx, 
602
sperm in urine, 
759
swollen nose, 
596
vaginal bleeding, 
838
wax production excess, 
584
Kidney-Yin deficiency with internal Wind, tremor of legs, 
700
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Liver-Yang rising, menopausal syndrome, 
856
Kidney-Yin deficiency with Phlegm, 
907
Kidneys not receiving Qi
breathlessness, 
661
pulsation feeling under umbilicus, 
742
knees
painful, 
344
 
, 
344
 
, 
697
stiff, 
699
weakness in, 
344
 
, 
698-699
 
, 
704-705
Knotted pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
knuckles, deformed, 
132
 
, 
132
 
, 
684
Ku
 
(‘bitter’), terminology problems, 
239
kyphosis, 
117
 
, 
117-118
 
, 
708
2598
L
lactation, 
408
 
, 
408
Large Intestine
Body Fluid deficiency, 
935
Damp-Heat in, 
921
deficient and Cold
abdominal pain, lateral-lower, 
740
blood and mucus in stools, 
750
Heat in 
See
 
Heat
heat patterns, 
921-922
pattern identification, 
921-923
pulse diagnosis, discrepancies, 
444
Large Intestine channel, 
993-994
abdomen, 
145
ears, 
105
 
, 
106
mouth, 
93
 
, 
94
nose, 
88
 
, 
88
palpation, 
528-529
 
, 
529
blood vessel, 
528-529
skin, 
529
philtrum, 
101
throat, 
109
 
, 
109
larynx, 
311
Latent Heat, 
958-962
 
, 
959
Bright-Yang type, 
961-962
clinical manifestations, 
959
 
, 
959
 
, 
960
Full/Empty, 
960
2599
Lesser-Yang type, 
961
Lesser-Yin type, 
960
 
, 
962
tiredness, 
285
 
, 
1023
types, 
960
Latent Heat in Lesser Yin, Five-Palm Heat, 
817
Latent Heat invasion 
vs
 
Wind-Heat, 
960
laughter, inappropriate, 
795
leaking roof pulse, 
507
learning difficulties (children), 
804
Leather pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
legs
arched, 
160
 
, 
160
 
, 
696
atrophy, 
160
 
, 
694-695
calves, cramp, 
344
 
, 
700-701
circulatory problems, pulse diagnosis, 
435
gait 
See
 
gait
groin pain, 
698
heaviness feeling in, 
699-700
inner, plucking of veins, 
1056-1057
knees 
See
 
knees
observation, 
159-162
oedema, 
159-160
 
, 
713
case history, 
160
paralysis, 
160
 
, 
695
restless, 
700
symptoms and signs, 
693-701
thigh pain, 
696-697
tremor, 
700
2600
ulcers (lower leg), 
701
weakness, 
699
 
See also
 
feet;
 
limbs
Lesser-Yang pattern (Six Stages)
bitter taste, 
727
dry throat, 
605
night sweating, 
776
Lesser-Yang stage
acupuncture, 
967
 
, 
979
clinical manifestations, 
813
 
, 
967
 
, 
979
Latent Heat, 
961
prescription, 
967
 
, 
979
tiredness, 
284
Lesser-Yang syndrome, abdominal pain, 
738
Lesser-Yin channels, headache, 
562
Lesser-Yin stage, 
968
Latent Heat, 
960
 
, 
962
leukoplakia, 
151
 
, 
859
Li, 
857
LI-4 Hegu, 
528
 
, 
529
 
, 
529
Li Ji Hou Zhong
 
(difficulty in defecation), 
751
Li Yan Cha
 
, 
1034
LI-5 Yangxi, 
528-529
 
, 
529
Li Zhong An Hui Tang
 
, 
1034
Li Zhong Tang
 
, 
1034
Lian Mei An Hui Tang
 
, 
1034
Lian Po Yin
 
, 
1034
Liang Di Tang
 
, 
1034-1035
Liang Fu Wan
 
, 
1035
Liang Ge San
 
, 
1035
Liang Shou Tang
 
, 
1035
libido, lack of
2601
female, 
393-394
 
, 
394
 
, 
860
male, 
392-393
 
, 
393
 
, 
766
Life Gate, 
194
 
, 
194
life line, 
133
 
, 
133
limbs
abnormal feelings, 
673-674
atrophy/flaccidity, 
153-154
 
, 
154
 
, 
338
 
, 
338
 
, 
674-675
Blood stasis, 
931
calves, 
344
children 
See
 
children
cold feet, 
344
contraction, 
63-64
 
, 
155
 
, 
155
 
, 
677
convulsions, 
155-156
 
, 
156
 
, 
678
elbow pain, 
342
 
, 
342
feeling of distension, 
338
 
, 
338-339
 
, 
674
causes, 
338
feeling of heaviness, 
339
flaccidity, 
154
 
, 
154
 
, 
675
generalized joint pain, 
339-340
 
, 
340
hand pain, 
342
 
, 
342
heaviness feeling, 
673-674
hip pain, 
343-344
 
, 
697
interrogation, 
337-345
knee pain, 
344
 
, 
344
movements, 
155-156
 
, 
676-677
muscle ache, 
339
 
, 
671
numbness/tingling, 
339
 
, 
339
 
, 
673
observation, 
153-157
2602
oedema, 
156-157
 
, 
157
 
, 
675-676
 
, 
713
pain in, 
672
painful feet, 
344-345
 
, 
345
Painful Obstruction Syndrome, 
64
paralysis, 
154-155
 
, 
155
 
, 
676-677
Phlegm-Fluids, 
937
rigidity, 
154
 
, 
154
 
, 
676
shoulders, 
341-342
swelling, 
157
 
, 
157
 
, 
675-676
symptoms and signs, 
671-715
thigh pain, 
344
 
, 
696-697
tremor, 
340-341
tremor/spasticity, 
61-65
 
, 
156
 
, 
156
 
, 
678
weakness, 
338
 
, 
338
 
, 
674
 
See also
 
arms;
 
legs
Lin Xiao
 
, 
179
lines, face, 
71
 
, 
574
Ling Gan Wu Wei Jiang Xin Tang
 
, 
1035
Ling Gui Zhu Gan Tang
 
, 
1035
Ling Jiao Gou Teng Tang
 
, 
1035
lips, 
308-309
abnormal colouring, 
94-96
 
, 
95
 
, 
96
bluish-greenish, 
95
 
, 
95
 
, 
622
pale, 
94-95
 
, 
95
 
, 
621
pregnancy, 
95-96
 
, 
96
 
, 
624
purple, 
95
 
, 
95
 
, 
621-622
red, 
95
 
, 
95
 
, 
621
yellow, 
95
 
, 
95
 
, 
622
channels, 
93-94
 
, 
94
2603
children, 
193
 
, 
194
cold sores, 
309
drooping, 
96
 
, 
624
dry or cracked, 
96
 
, 
96
 
, 
622-623
inverted lips, 
96
 
, 
624
macules, 
plate 21.2
observation, 
93-104
peeled, 
96
 
, 
623
swollen, 
96
 
, 
623
symptoms and signs, 
621-624
trembling, 
96
 
, 
623
voice influence, 
541
 
, 
542
 
See also
 
mouth
list of spine, 
118
 
, 
118
 
, 
708
listening 
See
 
hearing (listening)
Liu Jun Zi Tang
 
, 
1035
LIV-3 Taichong, 
536-537
 
, 
537
LIV-9 Yinbao, 
536-537
LIV-10 Wuli, 
536-537
 
, 
537
LIV-13 Zhangmen, 
521
LIV-14 Qimen, 
522
Liver
Body Fluid deficiency, 
935
channels, 
996
combined patterns, 
897-898
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
Ethereal Soul, movement, 
383
Heat in 
See
 
Heat
left middle pulse position, 
501
 
, 
501-502
 
, 
502
Liver-Blood deficiency patterns, 
895
2604
nails relationship, 
137
pattern identification, 
891-898
combined patterns, 
897-898
Phlegm-Fire 
See
 
Phlegm-Fire
Rebellious Liver Qi 
See
 
Rebellious Liver Qi
skin relationship, 
173
Liver- and Heart-Yin deficiency, post-natal depression, 
847
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency 
See
 
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Liver- and Spleen-Blood deficiency
dull-pale palate, 
624
pale-white nails, 
691
Liver- and Spleen deficiency, Five Retardations, 
869
Liver and Kidney deficiency
amenorrhoea, 
829
congenital, arched legs, 
696
drooping eyelids, 
640
hemiplegia, 
711
pain in limbs, 
672
premature greying, 
565
Liver-Blood and Kidney-Yang deficiency, joint pain after childbirth, 
844
Liver-Blood and Liver-Yin deficiency with internal Wind, trembling mouth, 
612
Liver-Blood deficiency
abdominal pain
after childbirth, 
844
in pregnancy, 
838
acupuncture, 
895
anxiety, 
800
atrophy of muscles in dorsum of hands, 
685
atrophy of thenar eminence, 
685
2605
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
case histories, 
1024
clinical manifestations, 
895
 
, 
930
 
, 
946
cold feet, 
694
constipation
after childbirth, 
845
in pregnancy, 
839
contraction
of fingers, 
686
of limbs, 
677
convulsion of limbs, 
678
cracked fingers, 
687
cramps in calves, 
700
dandruff, 
567
depression, 
798
dizziness, 
559
after childbirth, 
846
dry and brittle hair, 
566
dry and cracked lips, 
623
dry and dull teeth, 
617
dry skin, 
782
eye pain during menstruation, 
835
eye symptoms, 
358
fainting, 
560
fear/anxiety, 
793
feeling of cold, 
364
 
, 
366
 
, 
814
fever after childbirth, 
847
2606
hair falling out, 
565
headache, 
291
 
, 
294
during menstruation, 
832
hot and painful eyes, 
632
hypochondrial pain, after childbirth, 
844
insomnia, 
807
irritability, 
801
itching eyes, 
631
itching scalp, 
567
joint pain, 
710
after childbirth, 
844
lack of libido (female), 
860
leukoplakia, 
859
Liver-Yang rising, 
894
muscle ache in limbs, 
671
myopia, 
629
night vision decreased, 
630
numbness of half the body, 
712
numbness of head, 
563
numbness/tingling, 
712
of hands, 
683
in limbs, 
673
pale hands, 
681
pale lips, 
621
pale nose, 
589
patterns, 
895
premature greying, 
565
2607
premenstrual constipation, 
834
prescription, 
895
propensity to worry, 
792
restless legs, 
700
ridged nails, 
688
sadness, 
792
scalp itching, 
299
severe, dry eyes, 
632
strabismus, 
629
streaming eyes, 
633
tinnitus, 
582
twisted nails, 
691
vaginal bleeding, 
838
visual acuity decreased, 
630
weight loss, 
714
withered and brittle nails, 
689
yellow complexion, 
576
yellow sclera, 
635
Liver-Blood deficiency generating Liver-Wind, 
678
Liver-Blood deficiency generating Wind, 
894-895
acupuncture, 
895
clinical manifestations, 
894
 
, 
895
eye pain during menstruation, 
835
prescription, 
895
tremor of hands, 
684
tremor of legs, 
700
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty internal Wind, swollen scrotum, 
770
Liver-Blood deficiency with Empty-Wind
2608
cramps in calves, 
700-701
dry skin, 
782
itching around mouth, 
611
Liver-Blood deficiency with internal Cold, bluish-greenish nails, 
691-692
Liver-Blood deficiency with internal Wind, urticaria, 
784
Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Heat, streaming eyes, 
633
Liver-Blood deficiency with Liver-Wind
dandruff, 
567
facial tic, 
572
itching scalp, 
567
Liver-Blood deficiency with Phlegm, 
895
acupuncture, 
895
clinical manifestations, 
895
prescription, 
895
Liver-Blood deficiency with secondary Liver-Qi stagnation, premenstrual tension, 
832
Liver-Blood stasis, 
892-893
abdominal masses, 
744
abdominal pain, 
738
after childbirth, 
844
 
, 
845
central, lower, 
739
lateral-lower, 
740
acupuncture, 
893
alopecia, 
566
amenorrhoea after miscarriage, 
845
bluish-greenish nails, 
692
bluish-greenish nose, 
590
breast pain, 
850
case histories, 
1024
clinical manifestations, 
892-893
2609
Connecting channels of Brain (Eye system), contracted pupils, 
649
cracked fingers, 
687
cracked nails, 
688
cramps in calves, 
701
dyspareunia, 
859
eye pain during menstruation, 
835
fever after childbirth, 
847
gynaecomastia, 
670
hypochondrial lumps, 
147
 
, 
744
irritability, 
801
joint pain, after childbirth, 
844
limb paralysis, 
677
Liver-Qi stagnation with 
See
 
Liver-Qi stagnation
lochia, 
844
nose pain, 
595-596
nosebleed, 
595
painful periods, 
828
paralysis, 
710-711
of legs, 
695
premenstrual breast distension, 
832
prescription, 
893
protruding chest, 
668
purple nails, 
692
purple scrotum, 
770
reddish-purple nose, 
591
retention of placenta, 
843
rib pain, 
664
2610
sleep walking, 
811
sudden blindness, 
630
thickening of nails, 
688
thin and brittle nails, 
689
vaginal bleeding after childbirth, 
845
withered and brittle nails, 
690
yellow nose, 
590
Liver-Blood stasis with Phlegm
breasts, peau d’orange, 
852
inverted nipples, 
852
Liver-Blood stasis with Water overflowing, heartbeat displaced to the left, 
668
Liver channels
abdomen, 
145
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
 
, 
122
chest, 
143
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
Empty-Cold in 
See
 
Empty-Cold
eyes relationship, 
76-77
 
, 
77
genitalia, 
149
 
, 
149
 
, 
150
mouth relationship, 
93
 
, 
94
palpation, 
536-537
 
, 
537
blood vessel, 
536-537
skin, 
537
stagnation of Cold in, 
895
Wind-Heat in 
See
 
Wind-Heat
Liver deficiency, constitutional weakness, 
867
Liver Empty-Wind, 
970-971
acupuncture, 
970
2611
clinical manifestations, 
970
prescription, 
971
Liver-Fire
abdominal pain - central, lower, 
739
anxiety, 
800
in pregnancy, 
840
bitter taste, 
727
blazing with Phlegm-Heat, goitre, 
604
bleeding between iris and pupil, 
649
bleeding from ears, 
583
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
blushing, 
579
boils on scalp, 
568
brain noise, 
298
breast milk, 
847
burning sensations in soles of feet, 
701
constipation, 
748
contracted pupils, 
649
dandruff, 
567
dark nose, 
591
distension feeling in eyes, 
641
distension of head feeling, 
562
disturbed sleep, 
868
dizziness, 
560
drooping red eye membrane, 
646
dry eyes, 
632
dryness and redness of skin on lower back, 
706
2612
dyspareunia, 
859
earache, 
582
ecchymosis under conjunctiva, 
644
excessive dreaming, 
808
eye discharge, 
634
facial pain, 
303
 
, 
571
feeling of heat in head, 
299
Five-Palm Heat, 
817
glaucoma, 
641
haemorrhoids, 
762
head, feeling of distension, 
297
headache, 
288
 
, 
290
 
, 
561
during menstruation, 
832
heat of head, 
563
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
569
heavy periods, 
828
hot and painful eyes, 
632
hyperactivity, 
805
insomnia, 
808
insulting Lungs
breathlessness, 
662
chronic cough, 
660
nosebleed, 
594
invading Stomach
epigastric pain, 
738
vomiting of blood, 
725
irritability, 
801
2613
itching eyes, 
631
itching scalp, 
567
loud voice, 
819
mouth ulcers, 
610
nocturnal enuresis, 
757
 
, 
867
pain in soles of feet, 
698
painful tongue, 
614
propensity to anger, 
791
protruding eyeball, 
642
red eye corners, 
636
red membrane in corner of eye, 
646
red nose, 
590
red ring around pupil, 
648
red sclera, 
635
red veins in eyes, 
645
redness and pain of scalp, 
568
redness on throat, 
607-608
sour taste, 
727-728
streaming eyes, 
633
sudden blindness, 
630
sweating on head, 
778
swollen nose, 
596
thickening of nails, 
688
thirst, 
731
tinnitus, 
581
ulcers
in mastoid region, 
565
2614
on nose, 
598
on penis, 
773
on scalp, 
568
urination painful, 
754-755
weight loss, 
714
wide neck, 
655
withered and brittle nails, 
690
Liver-Fire Blazing Upwards, 
893
Liver-Fire generating Wind, 
894
Liver-Fire insulting Lungs, 
897-898
acupuncture, 
897-898
clinical manifestations, 
897
prescription, 
898
Liver-Fire insulting the Lungs, 
897-898
Liver-Heat stirs Wind, 
970
Liver patterns, case histories, 
1024
Liver Phlegm-Fire, 
896
acupuncture, 
896
clinical manifestations, 
896
prescription, 
896
Liver-Qi
constipation in pregnancy, 
840
Rebellious 
See
 
Rebellious Liver-Qi
Liver-Qi deficiency, 
896
acupuncture, 
896
clinical manifestations, 
896
empirical prescription by Dr Chen Jia Xu, 
1030
fear/anxiety, 
793
lack of libido (female), 
860
2615
prescription, 
896
severe timidity, 
795
soft and withered penis, 
771
Liver-Qi invading Spleen
borborygmi (bowel sounds), 
742
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
diarrhoea or loose stools, 
747
eyelids loss of control, 
640
flatulence, 
743
grinding teeth, 
616
quivering eyeball, 
644
sour taste, 
728
straining in defecation, 
752
Liver-Qi invading Stomach
belching, 
717
epigastric pain, 
737
gnawing hunger, 
721
hiccup, 
719
nausea, 
723
poor appetite, 
720
retching, 
725
sour regurgitation, 
718
sour taste, 
728
vomiting, 
724
Liver-Qi stagnation
abdominal distension (bloating), 
741
abdominal masses, 
744
 
, 
856
abdominal pain
2616
central, lower, 
739
lateral-lower, 
740
in pregnancy, 
838
abdominal pain (hypochondrial area), 
738
after childbirth, 
844
acupuncture, 
891
amenorrhoea after miscarriage, 
845
anxiety, 
800
 
, 
840
bluish-greenish complexion, 
578
bluish-greenish philtrum, 
626
brain noise, 
564
breast milk, 
847
breasts
distension, 
849
lumps, 
850
skin, peau d’orange, 
852
breech presentation, 
842
case histories, 
1024
chest pain, 
663
chest symptoms, 
321
clinical manifestations, 
891
cold hands, 
680
constipation, 
749
contraction of fingers, 
687
depression, 
382
 
, 
797
deviated neck, 
654
deviation of the mouth, 
613
2617
distension feeling
in chest, 
664
in eyes, 
642
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
facial tic, 
573
fainting, 
560
flatulence, 
743
headache, 
561
hoarse voice, 
820
inverted nipples, 
852
irregular periods, 
827
irritability, 
801
lack of libido
female, 
860
male, 
766
loud voice, 
819
lower backache, 
318
menstrual bleeding stopping and starting, 
830
milky nipple discharge, 
851
miscarriage, 
841
muscle ache in limbs, 
671
neck pain, 
654
obstruction feeling in throat, 
607
oedema of hands, 
684
oppression feeling in chest, 
664
pain
in hands, 
682
2618
in ribs, 
324
patterns, 
891-892
period pain, 
828
premature greying, 
565
premenstrual breast distension, 
832
premenstrual tension, 
831
prescription, 
891
propensity to anger, 
791
protruding eyeball, 
643
rib pain, 
664
rigidity of neck, 
654
scanty and difficult urination, 
755
severe
breast pain, 
850
chest protruding on one side, 
669
protruding chest, 
668
sighing, 
670
stiff neck, 
653
tiredness, 
285
case histories, 
284
upper backache, 
656
urinary difficulty, 
756
after childbirth, 
845
urination painful, 
755
urine retention, 
839
yawning, 
670
 
See also
 
entries beginning
 
Stagnant Liver-Qi
Liver-Qi stagnation - turned into Heat
2619
spots on the back, 
706
yellow sweat, 
777
Liver-Qi stagnation - turned into Heat rebelling upwards
depression, 
797
energy rising feeling in abdomen, 
742
glaucoma, 
641
Liver-Qi stagnation - turned into Liver-Fire
menstrual bleeding returning after menopause, 
830
nosebleed during menstruation, 
834
painful periods, 
829
premenstrual breast distension, 
832
Liver-Qi stagnation invading Intestines, premenstrual constipation, 
834
Liver-Qi stagnation invading Spleen
constipation and loose stools alternation, 
749-750
diarrhoea during menstruation, 
833
Liver-Qi stagnation invading Spleen with Dampness, constipation and loose stools
alternation, 
750
Liver-Qi stagnation invading Stomach, vomiting during menstruation, 
835
Liver-Qi stagnation with Blood deficiency, startled easily, 
793-794
Liver-Qi stagnation with Blood-Heat, rash in axillae, 
785
Liver-Qi stagnation with Blood stasis, breast lumps, 
850
Liver-Qi stagnation with Damp-Heat in Liver channel
five-colour vaginal discharge, 
858
red-white vaginal discharge, 
857
Liver-Qi stagnation with Liver-Blood deficiency, paralysis, 
711
Liver-Qi stagnation with Liver-Blood stasis
protruding eyeball, 
643
ulcers on neck, 
789
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm, 
892
acupuncture, 
892
2620
breast pain, 
850
clinical manifestations, 
892
prescription, 
892
protruding eyeball, 
642
swollen breasts, 
850
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm-Heat, swollen breasts, 
850
Liver-Qi stagnation with Qi-Phlegm, depression, 
797
Liver-Qi with Liver-Blood stagnation, neck ulcers, 
789
Liver-Wind
alopecia, 
566
arm tremor, 
341
bluish/greenish complexion, 
578
bluish-greenish sclera, 
635
contracted pupils, 
649
contraction of fingers, 
687
deviation of the mouth, 
613
distension feeling in eyes, 
642
dizziness, 
295
 
, 
560
Extreme Heat generating Wind, 
893-894
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
eye pain during menstruation, 
835
facial tic, 
572
headache, 
290
 
, 
561
hemiplegia, 
711
hot and painful eyes, 
632
itching eyes, 
631
limb convulsions, 
678
limb rigidity, 
676
2621
Liver-Blood deficiency giving rise to Wind, 
894-895
Liver-Fire generating Wind, 
894
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Blood deficiency, 
894
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind, 
894
neck pain, 
654
numbness
of face, 
572
of half the body, 
712
of head, 
563
of tongue, 
614
numbness/tingling
of hands, 
683
in limbs, 
673
opisthotonos, 
715
patterns, 
893-895
protruding eyeball, 
642
rigidity of neck, 
654
stiff neck, 
653
strabismus, 
629
sudden blindness, 
631
trembling mouth, 
612
tremor of hands, 
684
tremor of head, 
564
tremor/spasticity of limbs, 
678
Liver-Wind agitating within, eclampsia, 
841
Liver-Wind and Phlegm
deviation of the mouth, 
613
dilated pupils, 
649
2622
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
facial tic, 
572
headache, 
290
tremor of hands, 
684
Liver-Wind harbouring Phlegm, 
895
Liver-Wind with Phlegm-Heat, protruding eyeball, 
642
Liver-Yang deficiency, 
896-897
acupuncture, 
897
clinical manifestations, 
896-897
 
, 
897
prescription, 
897
Liver-Yang rising, 
892
acupuncture, 
892
anxiety, 
800
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
blushing, 
579
case histories, 
1024
clinical manifestations, 
892
distension feeling
in eyes, 
642
of head, 
562
dizziness, 
295
 
, 
559
headache, 
288
 
, 
289-290
 
, 
291
 
, 
292
 
, 
293
 
, 
294
 
, 
561
during menstruation, 
832
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
569
hot and painful eyes, 
632
insomnia before menstruation, 
835
irritability, 
801
limb rigidity, 
676
2623
neck pain, 
654
prescription, 
892
propensity to anger, 
791
red complexion, 
577
redness on throat, 
607-608
rigidity of neck, 
654
stiff neck, 
653
strabismus, 
629
tinnitus, 
581
upper backache, 
656
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Blood deficiency, 
894
Liver-Yang rising deriving from Liver-Yin deficiency, 
894
Liver-Yang rising generating Liver-Wind, limb convulsions, 
678
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind, 
894
 
, 
945
Liver- and Kidney-Yin deficiency, 
894
Liver-Yin deficiency, 
894
Liver Yin and Kidney- deficiency 
See
 
Kidney- and Liver-Yin deficiency
Liver-Yin deficiency
abdominal distension (bloating), 
741
abdominal pain (hypochondrial area), 
738
acupuncture, 
896
anxiety, 
800
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
clinical manifestations, 
895-896
contraction of fingers, 
686
dry eyes, 
631-632
dry scalp, 
568
dry skin, 
782
2624
dry throat, 
605
fainting, 
560
insomnia, 
808
itching eyes, 
631
itching scalp, 
567
Liver-Yang rising deriving from, 
894
patterns, 
895-896
prescription, 
896
ridged nails, 
688
sleep talking, 
810
sleep walking, 
810-811
thin and brittle nails, 
689
thirst, 
732
visual acuity decreased, 
630
withered and brittle nails, 
689
withered and thickened nails, 
690
Liver-Yin deficiency generating Wind
tremor of hands, 
684
tremor of legs, 
700
Liver-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
896
acupuncture, 
896
blood in urine, 
839
clinical manifestations, 
896
excessive dreaming, 
809
prescription, 
896
red eye corners, 
636
red veins in eyes, 
645
sleep talking, 
810
2625
sleep walking, 
811
sweating in axillae, 
779
lochia, 
843-844
observation, 
166-167
smell, 
551
 
See also
 
vaginal discharge
Long Chi Qing Hun Tang
 
, 
1035-1036
Long Dan Bi Yuan Fang
 
, 
1036
Long Dan Xie Gan Tang
 
, 
1036
Long pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
lordosis, 
117
 
, 
117
 
, 
707
Loss of Body Fluids
dull-white nails, 
691
shriveled and wrinkled fingers, 
688
love (obsessional/misdirected), 
425-426
 
, 
426
lower back 
See
 
back
Lower Burner
finger disease reflection, 
141
pattern identification, 
970-971
pulse diagnosis
Foot section, 
437
 
, 
438
position assignment, 
443
state of, 
434
 
, 
435
Lown–Ganong–Levine (LGL) Syndrome, pulse indication, 
460
LU-1 Zhongfu, 
521
 
, 
528
 
, 
528
LU-4 Xiabai, 
528
 
, 
528
Lu Jiao Tu Si Zi Wan
 
, 
1036
Lui Wei Di Huang Wan
 
, 
1035
lumbar flattening, spine, 
117
 
, 
118
 
, 
708
Lung(s)
Body Fluid deficiency, 
935
2626
channels, 
993
Cold-Phlegm in, 
902
combined patterns, 
903-904
Damp-Phlegm in 
See
 
Damp-Phlegm
Dry-Heat in 
See
 
Dry-Heat
Dryness 
See
 
Dryness
emphysema
heartbeat, 
128
spoon-shaped fingers, 
131
 
, 
131
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of Gathering-Qi), 
903-
904
Heat in 
See
 
Heat
Heat in Lungs (Qi level), 
969-970
pattern identification, 
899-904
combined patterns, 
903-904
Phlegm 
See
 
Phlegm
Phlegm-Dryness in, 
902-903
Phlegm-Fluids in the Lungs, 
903
Phlegm-Heat in 
See
 
Phlegm-Heat in Lungs
Phlegm patterns, 
902-903
right front pulse position, 
503
 
, 
503-504
 
, 
504
skin relationship, 
170-172
thumb lunula correspondence, 
140
Toxic Heat in 
See
 
Toxic Heat
voice influence, 
541
 
, 
542
Wind-Heat in Lung Defensive-Qi portion, 
969
Yang deficiency of Heart and, feeling of cold, 
814
Lung- and Heart- Yang deficiency, 
363
2627
Lung- and Heart-Qi deficiency 
See
 
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of
Gathering-Qi)
Lung- and Kidney - constitutional deficiency, protruding sternum, 
669
Lung- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
blocked nose, 
592
bluish/greenish complexion, 
578
Empty-Heat with, sore throat, 
601
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency
dry eyes, 
632
hoarse voice, 
606
 
, 
820
spoon-shaped fingers, 
687
sunken chest, 
669
Lung- and Kidney-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
nosebleed during menstruation, 
834
redness and swelling of pharynx, 
602
white purulent spots in throat, 
606
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
aching nose, 
595
blocked nose, 
591
constipation, 
749
cough in children, 
865
coughing blood, 
661
dry nostrils, 
594
frequent urination, 
756
incontinence
faecal, 
750
urinary, 
757
inverted eyelashes, 
650
loss of sense of smell, 
597
2628
nasal voice, 
821
Phlegm in the Lungs with, snoring, 
811
severe and chronic, sunken eyeball, 
643
snoring, 
811
 
, 
821
straining in defecation, 
752
urinary difficulty after childbirth, 
845
yellow sweat, 
777
Lung- and Spleen-Yang deficiency, swollen fingers, 
686
Lung- and Stomach-Heat, nose pain, 
595
Lung- and Stomach-Qi stagnation, obstruction feeling in throat, 
607
Lung-Blood stasis, 
930-931
lung cancer, 
457
 
See also
 
cancer
Lung channel
back, 
115
chest, 
143
 
, 
143
nose, 
87-88
 
, 
88
palpation, 
528
 
, 
528
blood vessel, 
528
skin, 
528
Lung cracks, 
205
 
, 
205
Lung deficiency
constitutional weakness, 
867
flapping of nostrils, 
870
Lung deficiency with Phlegm-Heat, blood vessels distended on ear, 
586
Lung-Dryness, 
901
chronic cough, 
660
itching throat, 
605
Lung-Heat, 
902
acupuncture, 
902
 
, 
955
2629
acute
flapping alae nasi (nostrils), 
598
nosebleed, 
594
acute cough, 
659-660
blocked nose, 
591-592
Blood Level (Four Levels), coughing blood, 
661
breathlessness, 
662
clinical manifestations, 
902
 
, 
955
coughing blood, 
660-661
dry nostrils, 
593
heat feeling in chest, 
665
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hoarse voice/loss of voice, 
606
hot hands, 
680
hot upper back, 
656
irritability, 
801
loud voice, 
819
mental restlessness, 
794
papular eruptions, 
573
papules on nose, 
599
prescription, 
902
 
, 
955
red eye corners, 
636
red helix, 
586
red nose, 
590
red sclera, 
635
redness on throat, 
607
scaly eyeballs, 
643
2630
sweaty palms, 
682
swollen nose, 
596
thirst, 
732
tongue diagnosis, 
205
 
, 
205
ulcers on nose, 
598
Lung-Qi, rebellious, 
643
Lung-Qi and Kidney-Yang deficiency (Governing Vessel deficient)
breathlessness, 
662
itching nose, 
593
kyphosis, 
708
Lung-Qi and Lung-Yin deficiency, 
900-901
acupuncture, 
901
clinical manifestations, 
900-901
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of Gathering-Qi), 
903-
904
prescription, 
901
Lung-Qi collapse, 
903
Lung-Qi deficiency, 
899
acupuncture, 
899
breathlessness, 
661
chronic cough, 
322
 
, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
899
itching nose, 
593
limb oedema, 
675
nocturnal enuresis, 
758
not descending, scanty and difficult urination, 
755
oedema of the face, 
572
patterns, 
899-900
2631
prescription, 
899
propensity to worry, 
792
sneezing, 
304
 
, 
591
spontaneous sweating, 
775
sunken chest, 
668-669
sweaty palms, 
681
 
, 
779
urination difficult, 
755
weak voice, 
820
Lung-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat, bad smell sensation, 
597
Lung-Qi deficiency with Empty-Cold
dribbling from mouth, 
612
runny nose, 
592
Lung-Qi deficiency with Phlegm, 
899-900
acupuncture, 
899-900
breathlessness, 
662
clinical manifestations, 
899
mouth open, 
612
prescription, 
900
wheezing, 
663
Lung-Qi stagnation, 
903
acupuncture, 
903
breast distension, 
849
breathlessness, 
661
chest, feeling of oppression/tightness, 
324
chest pain, 
663
clinical manifestations, 
903
distension feeling in chest, 
665
hoarse voice, 
820
2632
irritability, 
801
loud voice, 
819
oppression feeling in chest, 
664
premenstrual breast distension, 
833
prescription, 
903
propensity to worry, 
792
sadness, 
792
sighing, 
670
yawning, 
670
Lung-Qi stagnation with Phlegm
phlegm in throat, 
603
premenstrual breast distension, 
833
Lung-Yang deficiency, 
900
clinical manifestations, 
900
cold hands, 
680
oedema of hands, 
684
pain in hands, 
682
pale hands, 
681
Phlegm with 
See
 
Phlegm
prescription, 
900
spontaneous sweating, 
775
sweaty palms, 
681
Lung-Yang deficiency with Phlegm, wheezing, 
663
Lung-Yang deficiency with Water overflowing, muscle twitching, 
715
Lung-Yin and Blood deficiency, amenorrhoea, 
829
Lung-Yin deficiency
acupuncture, 
900
breathlessness, 
661
2633
chest sunken on one side, 
669
chronic cough, 
322
 
, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
900
cough in pregnancy, 
840
dry skin, 
782
dry throat, 
605
hoarse voice/loss of voice, 
606
hot upper back, 
656
itching throat, 
605
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency, 
909
Kidney- and Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
909-910
obstruction feeling in throat, 
607
pain in hands, 
683
patterns, 
900
prescription, 
900
sunken chest, 
669
sweaty palms, 
681
 
, 
779
thirst, 
732
voice loss, 
840-841
Lung-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
acupuncture, 
900
blushing, 
579
chronic cough, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
900
coughing blood, 
661
dry nostrils, 
593
flapping alae nasi (nostrils), 
598
2634
heat feeling in chest, 
665
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hot hands, 
680
nose pain, 
595
prescription, 
900
red eye corners, 
636
redness of pharynx, 
602
redness on throat, 
607-608
thirst, 
732
Lung-Yin deficiency with Phlegm, 
900
acupuncture, 
900
clinical manifestations, 
900
prescription, 
900
wheezing, 
663
Lungs
invasion by Wind, 
901-902
invasion by Wind-Cold, 
901
invasion by Wind-Dryness, 
901
invasion by Wind-Heat, 
901
invasion by Wind-Water, 
901-902
acupuncture, 
902
clinical manifestations, 
901-902
prescription, 
902
lunulae 
See
 
nails
Luo channels
connecting, 
525
 
See also
 
Connecting channels
skin, 
174
Luo Mai
 
, 
525
2635
lurking pain 
(Yin Tong)
 
, pain classification, 
257
lustre
body skin, 
175
complexion, 
40
lustre/lustreless colour, 
44
 
, 
47
eyes, 
37
 
, 
75
 
, 
80
spirit and emotion, 
36
 
, 
37
 
, 
40
 
, 
80
 
, 
plate 6.1
2636
M
Ma Huang Tang
 
, 
1036
Ma Mu
 
, 
299
Ma Xing Shi Gan Tang
 
, 
1036
Ma Zhen
 
, 
180
Ma Zi Ren Wan
 
, 
1036
macules, 
176-177
 
, 
177
 
, 
178,
 
, 
plate 21.1,
 
, 
plate 21.2
black, 
177
connecting channels, 
174
eruptions, 
573
purple, 
177
 
, 
plate 21.1
red, 
177
shape and density, 
177
vs
 
vesicles/papules, 
958
white, 
177
Yang, 
176
Yin, 
177
Mai Men Dong Tang
 
, 
1036
malignant melanoma, 
186
 
, 
186,
 
, 
plate 21.37
nodular, 
plate 21.36,
 
, 
plate 21.38
pathology and diagnosis, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
186
superficial spreading, 
plate 21.35,
 
, 
plate 21.38,
 
, 
plate 21.39
symptoms and signs, 
788
 
See also
 
cancer
mania, 
388
 
, 
799
depression patterns, 
382
 
, 
383
 
, 
798-799
depressive phase, 
798-799
 
See also
 
joy,
 
excess
mastoid ulcers, 
70
ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis) 
See
 
postviral fatigue syndrome
2637
measles, 
180
 
, 
180
 
, 
586
melanoma 
See
 
malignant melanoma
memory, poor, 
803-804
Men
 
(‘feeling of oppression’), 
664
terminology problems, 
238-239
menarche, 
396
menopause
hot flushes, 
301
 
, 
302
 
, 
401
 
, 
569-571
menstrual bleeding returning after, 
830
night sweating, 
401
symptoms/signs, 
856
menstrual bleeding, 
825-826
case history, 
399-400
colour, 
166
 
, 
166
 
, 
400
 
, 
400
 
, 
825-826
consistency, 
166
 
, 
166
 
, 
400
 
, 
400
intermittent, 
830
menstrual clots, 
826
mid-cycle bleeding, 
829-830
pale, 
825
post-menopause, 
830
purple, 
825-826
quantity, 
399-400
 
, 
400
 
, 
403
sticky, 
826
watery, 
826
menstrual pain, 
401-404
 
, 
404
 
, 
828-829
case histories, 
402-404
 
, 
1016
nature of pain, 
402-404
time of pain, 
401-402
 
See also
 
menstruation, problem symptoms
menstruation, 
398-406
2638
age of menarche, 
396
 
, 
399
 
, 
401
amenorrhoea, 
400
 
, 
401
 
, 
829
bleeding 
See
 
menstrual bleeding
early (short cycle), 
827
gynaecological symptoms and signs, 
827-830
 
, 
831-835
heavy, 
827-828
irregular, 
827
late (long cycle), 
827
menstrual cycle, 
396
 
, 
396-397
 
, 
399
 
, 
401
irregularities, 
400-401
mid-cycle bleeding, 
829-830
pain 
See
 
menstrual pain
premenstrual breast distension, 
398
 
, 
399
premenstrual symptoms 
See
 
premenstrual symptoms
problem symptoms, 
831-835
body aches, 
833
diarrhoea, 
833-834
dizziness, 
835
eye pain, 
835
fever, 
833
headache, 
832
insomnia, 
835
mouth ulcers, 
834
nosebleed, 
834
oedema, 
833
skin eruptions, 
834
vomiting, 
835
2639
pulse and, 
451
scanty, 
828
symptoms and signs, 
827-835
tension before 
See
 
premenstrual symptoms
 
menstruation, problem
symptoms
mental difficulties
concentration difficulties, 
804
hyperactivity, 
804-805
learning difficulties (children), 
804
poor memory, 
803-804
symptoms/sign, 
803-805
 
See also
 
mental-emotional symptoms
mental-emotional symptoms, 
379-389
depression 
See
 
depression
emotional problems at puberty and overwork, 
416-417
excess joy, 
388
 
, 
389
 
, 
794
 
See also
 
mania
fear/anxiety 
See
 
anxiety;
 
fear
irritability/anger, 
385
 
See also
 
irritability
menopause, 
401
mental restlessness, 
388-389
miscarriage, 
408
sadness/grief, 
387-388
 
See also
 
grief
schizophrenia, 
802
symptoms and signs, 
797-802
weak Heart constitution and emotional problems, 
417
worry/overthinking, 
386-387
 
See also
 
emotional symptoms;
emotions;
 
mental difficulties
mental restlessness, 
251
 
, 
388-389
patterns, 
389
2640
symptoms and signs, 
794
Metal
Fire overacting on Metal, 
1008
Wood insulting Metal, 
1009
Metal insulting Fire, 
1009
Metal not generating Water, 
1008
Metal overacting on Wood, 
1008
Metal type
abdomen size, 
146
body odour, 
549
 
, 
550
body shape, 
19
 
, 
19
Earth not generating Metal, 
1008
face, 
plate 1.5
voice, 
542
 
, 
542
metallic taste, 
728
microsystems, 
8
 
, 
8-9
ears, 
8
face, 
7-8
micturition 
See
 
urination (micturition)
middle age, Five Stages of Life, 
418
Middle Burner
finger disease reflection, 
140
 
, 
141
pattern identification, 
970
pulse diagnosis
Gate section, 
437
 
, 
438
position assignment, 
443
state of, 
434
 
, 
435
 
See also
 
Three Burners (Triple Burner)
migraine
case histories, 
291-293
 
See also
 
headache
Mind
2641
depression, 
798
mood and Ethereal Soul, 
382
 
, 
382
observation
body, mind and complexion, 
1-66
eyes, 
75
 
, 
76
mind, spirit and emotions, 
31-38
 
, 
1016
Phlegm misting the Mind, 
882
relationship with Ethereal Soul, 
383
 
, 
383
spirit/body relationship, 
32
 
, 
347
 
, 
542
Ming Men
 
(Fire of the Gate of Life), 
80
 
, 
766
Ming Tang
 
, 
87
Ming Tang
 
(nose), 
303
Minister Fire, tongue red points, 
211
Minister Fire blazing upwards, nocturnal emissions, 
767
Minister Fire deficiency
cold genitals in men, 
769
 
See also
 
Kidney-Yang deficiency
Minute Connecting channels, 
526
 
See also
 
Connecting channels
Minute pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
miscarriage, 
408
amenorrhoea following, 
845
habitual, 
842
threatened, 
84
moles, 
185-186
monoamine oxydase inhibitors (MAOI), 
508
mood swings, 
1016
morning sickness, 
406
 
, 
837-838
motivation, lack of, 
1022
motor-neurone disease, 
61
 
, 
153
Mountain Rampart, 
79
mouth, 
308-309
2642
channels, 
93-94
 
, 
94
children, 
193
 
, 
194
cold sores, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
309
 
, 
610-611
cracked corners, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
611
deviation of, 
71
 
, 
97-98
 
, 
98
 
, 
573
signs, 
613
dribbling from corners, 
98
 
, 
98
 
, 
612
dry, 
279
 
, 
732-733
eye/mouth deviation, 
60
 
, 
60
increased salivation, 
733
itching, 
611
observation, 
93-104
open, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
612
oral thrush (candida), 
187
palate
abnormal colour, 
98-99
 
, 
99
 
, 
624-625
symptoms and signs, 
624-625
white spots, 
872
Yin organs, 
98
 
, 
98
philtrum 
See
 
philtrum
saliva, 
94
symptoms and signs, 
609-613
trembling, 
612
ulcers, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
308
 
, 
308-309
 
, 
609-610
 
, 
834
 
See also
 
gums;
 
lips;
 
teeth;
tongue
Moving pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Mu Xiang Liu Qi Yin
 
, 
1036-1037
Mu Xuan
 
(‘blurred vision’), 
360
2643
mucus, in stools, 
271
multiple sclerosis, 
62
mumps, 
870
muscle ache, limbs, 
339
Muscle channels, 
527
characteristics, 
527
functions, 
527
palpation, 
527
muscle twitching (fasciculation), 
63
 
, 
714-715
muscles
limbs 
See
 
limbs
space between skin and, 
176
spinal
atrophy, 
116
 
, 
705
children, 
194
myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) 
See
 
postviral fatigue syndrome
myomas, 
135
myopia, 
629
2644
N
naevi (moles), 
plate 21.34
differentiation of, 
186
pathology and diagnosis, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
185-186
symptoms and signs, 
787-788
nails
abnormal colour, 
139
 
, 
140
 
, 
691-692
bluish-greenish, 
139
 
, 
691-692
coarse and thick, 
138
 
, 
688
cracked, 
138
 
, 
688
curling, 
139
 
, 
690
dark, 
139
 
, 
692
dry skin and, 
178
dull-white, 
139
 
, 
691
falling off, 
139
 
, 
689
flaking, 
138
 
, 
690
indented, 
137
 
, 
138
 
, 
689
lunulae, 
140
large, 
692
men and women, 
140
small or absent, 
692
normal, 
137
observation, 
137-142
onset of disease indication, 
137
organ system correspondence, 
140-142
pale-white, 
139
 
, 
691
palpation, 
520
2645
purple, 
139
 
, 
692
red, 
139
 
, 
691
ridged, 
137
 
, 
688
surface abnormalities, 
137-138
 
, 
139
symptoms and signs, 
688-692
thickening, 
138
 
, 
688
thin and brittle, 
138
 
, 
689
twisted, 
139
 
, 
691
white spots, 
139
 
, 
691
withered and brittle, 
138
 
, 
689-690
withered and thickened, 
138
 
, 
690
yellow, 
139
 
, 
691
 
See also
 
finger(s);
 
hands
nasal discharge, 
164
 
, 
164
 
See also
 
rhinitis
nasal voice, 
543
 
, 
820-821
nausea
morning sickness, 
406
patterns, 
266
premenstrual symptoms, 
405
retching, 
725
symptoms and signs, 
723-724
 
See also
 
vomiting
neck
carbuncles, 
788
channels influencing, 
109
 
, 
109-110
 
, 
110
 
, 
312
deviated, 
113
 
, 
113
 
, 
654
goitre, 
315-316
 
, 
316
interrogation, 
311-316
length, 
112
long, 
112
 
, 
112
2646
observation, 
109-114
pain, 
316
 
, 
316
 
, 
654
rigidity, 
112-113
 
, 
654
rigidity/stiffness, 
59-60
 
, 
316
 
, 
316
short, 
112
 
, 
112
soft, 
113
 
, 
654
stiff, 
653
swollen glands, 
114
 
, 
114
 
, 
655
symptoms and signs, 
653-656
thin, 
114
 
, 
114
ulcers, 
789
wide, 
113
 
, 
113
 
, 
655
 
See also
 
throat
Nei Bu Wan
 
, 
1037
nephritis, hand lines, 
135
night sweating, 
251
 
, 
351-352
 
, 
352
 
, 
385
 
, 
776
menopause, 
401
nighttime pain, 
257
nine orifices, internal organs and five senses relationship, 
2
 
, 
2
nipple(s), 
851-852
abnormalities, 
124-125
bloody discharge, 
851-852
cracked, 
125
 
, 
852
discharge, 
124
 
, 
124
inverted, 
125
 
, 
852
milky discharge, 
851
sticky yellow discharge, 
851
nocturnal emissions, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
767
nocturnal enuresis, 
274
 
, 
275
 
, 
757-758
 
, 
867
Nong Pao
 
, 
178
2647
nose, 
303-306
abnormal colour, 
89
 
, 
89-90
 
, 
90
 
, 
589-591
bluish-greenish, 
89
 
, 
89
 
, 
590
dark, 
90
 
, 
90
 
, 
591
pale, 
89
 
, 
89
 
, 
589
red, 
89
 
, 
89
 
, 
590
reddish-purple, 
89-90
 
, 
90
 
, 
591
yellow, 
89
 
, 
89
 
, 
589-590
aching, 
305
 
, 
305
 
, 
595
bad smell sensation, 
597
bleeding, 
90
 
, 
594-595
blocked, 
304
 
, 
304
carcinoma, 
596
channels influencing, 
87-88
 
, 
88
children 
See
 
children
discharge from, 
164
 
, 
164
dry nostrils, 
306
 
, 
306
face reading, 
87
internal organ relationship, 
88
 
, 
88-89
itching, 
304
 
, 
304
 
, 
593
nostrils 
See
 
nostrils
observation, 
87-92
organs influencing, 
304
pain, 
595-596
pain in, 
305
 
, 
306
papules on, 
90
 
, 
598-599
polyps in, 
90
 
, 
598
2648
rhinitis, 
87
runny, 
305
 
, 
305
 
, 
592-593
sinusitis, 
87
sneezing 
See
 
sneezing
swollen, 
90
 
, 
596-597
symptoms and signs, 
589-600
ulcers on, 
90
 
, 
598
Yang convergence, 
87
 
See also
 
smell/smelling (olfaction)
nosebleed, 
90
 
, 
594-595
menstrual symptoms, 
834
nostrils, 
90
dry, 
90
 
, 
306
 
, 
306
 
, 
593-594
flapping, 
90
 
, 
598
 
, 
870
Nu Lao Dan
 
, 
175
Nuan Gan Jian
 
, 
1037
numbness/tingling, 
319
 
, 
319
half of body, 
712
hands, 
343
 
, 
343
limbs, 
339
 
, 
339
 
, 
673
 
, 
712
Nutritional Impairment Patterns, inflamed gums, 
619
Nutritive and Defensive Qi not harmonized
fever during menstruation, 
833
unilateral sweating, 
778
Nutritive and Defensive Qi obstructed, yellow sweat, 
777
2649
O
obesity, 
319
 
, 
713-714
observation
babies, 
1057-1058
body, mind and complexion, 
1-66
body movements, 
59-66
body shape, physique and demeanour, 
11-29
complexion colour, 
39-58
constitutional traits, 
9-10
diagnosis by, 
1-233
integration with interrogation, 
242
mind, spirit and emotions, 
31-38
parts of the body, 
67-200
back, 
115-120
breasts, 
121-125
chest and abdomen, 
143-147
children, 
191-200
ears, 
105-108
excretions, 
163-167
eyes, 
75-86
face, 
69-74
genitalia, 
149-151
hair, 
69-74
hands, 
129-136
head, 
69-74
heartbeat, 
127-128
legs, 
159-162
2650
limbs, 
153-157
mouth and lips, 
93-104
nails, 
137-142
nose, 
87-92
skin, 
169-190
throat and neck, 
109-114
 
see also individual entries
tongue diagnosis, 
201-232
Obstruction of Spleen by Dampness with stagnation of Liver-Qi, 
889
odour, diagnosis by 
See
 
smell/smelling
oedema
abdomen, 
146
 
, 
745
after childbirth, 
846
blood, 
179
clinical manifestations, 
935
face, 
71
 
, 
572
feet, 
345
hands, 
343
legs, 
159-160
 
, 
713
case history, 
160
limbs, 
156-157
 
, 
157
 
, 
675-676
 
, 
713
menstrual symptoms, 
833
in pregnancy, 
406
 
, 
838
premenstrual, 
405
skin, 
179
 
, 
179
old age
Five Stages of Life, 
418
 
See also
 
elderly
olfaction 
See
 
smell/smelling (olfaction)
opisthotonos, 
63
 
, 
715
2651
oppression, abdominal pain, 
735
 
See also
 
Men
 
(‘feeling of oppression’)
optic nerve, 
80
oral thrush, 
187
organ patterns
Bright-Yang, 
967
Greater Yang stage, 
966-967
Heat in Bright Yang, 
374
orgasm
female
anorgasmia, 
393-394
excessive sexual activity, 
430
headache after, 
394
male 
See
 
ejaculation
Original Qi deficiency
and kidney-Yang deficiency, 
560
urine retention in infants, 
867
otitis media, case history, 
1021
ovarian cysts, hand lines, 
135
Overflowing pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
overthinking, 
386-387
patterns, 
387
overwork, 
282
 
, 
416-417
 
, 
974
2652
P
paediatric symptoms/signs, 
861-872
 
See also
 
children
pain
abdominal 
See
 
abdominal pain
bluish/greenish complexion, 
578
bowel movements, 
258
 
, 
270
 
, 
273
breast(s), 
398
character of, headache, 
288-289
classification, 
255-260
coccyx, 
705
continuous, 
257
daytime, 
257
effect of eating/drinking, 
258
 
, 
264
elbows, 
342
 
, 
342
 
, 
679
epigastric, 
329
 
, 
329
eyelids, 
639
eyes, 
358
 
, 
358-359
 
, 
359
 
, 
632-633
 
, 
835
face, 
571-572
factors affecting, 
254-255
 
, 
258-259
feet, 
344-345
 
, 
345
groin, 
698
hands, 
342
 
, 
342
 
, 
682-683
hips, 
343-344
 
, 
697
hypochondrial pain 
See
 
hypochondrial pain
intermittent, 
257
interrogation, 
253-260
joints, 
710
2653
knees, 
344
 
, 
344
 
, 
697
localized, 
255
movement/rest, 
258-259
moving, 
255
nature of, 
254
 
, 
255-257
boring pain, 
257
colicky pain, 
256
cutting pain, 
257
distending pain (‘
Zhang Tong’)
 
, 
255-256
lurking pain 
(Yin Tong)
 
, 
257
pulling pain, 
257
pushing pain, 
257
soreness, 
255
spastic pain, 
256
throbbing pain, 
257
neck, 
654
nighttime, 
257
nose, 
595-596
organ 
vs.
 
channel pain, 
259
 
, 
259
pressure, 
258
in ribs, 
324
 
, 
324
 
, 
664
scalp, 
69
 
, 
568
shoulders, 
341-342
 
, 
342
soles of feet, 
345
 
, 
698
temperature, 
258
testicles, 
773
thighs, 
344
 
, 
696-697
2654
timing, 
254
 
, 
257
tolerance, 
27-28
tongue, 
613-614
in tongue, 
309
umbilical, 
332
 
, 
738-739
during urination, 
839
xyphoid process, 
328-329
 
, 
329
 
, 
736-737
pain tolerance, body shape, 
27-28
 
, 
28
Painful Obstruction Syndrome, 
64
 
, 
113
 
, 
214
 
, 
985
case histories, 
1020
channel palpation in, 
527-528
Chronic, deformed knuckles, 
684
Cold, rigidity of neck, 
654
Cold-Dampness, swelling of fingers, 
686
Damp, swelling of joints in limbs, 
676
Damp-Heat, swelling of fingers, 
686
deformed knuckles, 
132
generalized joint pain, 
340
neck pain/stiffness, 
316
organ 
vs.
 
channel pain, 
259
shoulder, 
341
swelling of joints, 
157
Wind-Damp
neck pain, 
654
stiff neck, 
653
swelling of fingers, 
686
withered and brittle nails, 
138
palate 
See
 
mouth
2655
paleness, tongue-body colour, 
210
palms 
See
 
hands
palpation, 
509-524
abdomen, 
510-512
 
, 
513-516
 
See also
 
abdomen
acupuncture points, 
520-522
babies temples, 
518-519
 
, 
519
breasts, 
513
channels, 
525-538
chest, 
512-513
 
See also
 
chest
diagnosis by, 
431-538
feet and hands, 
519-520
 
See also
 
feet;
 
hands
forearm, 
517-518
forehead, 
517
pressing, 
509
 
, 
510
 
, 
527
skin, 
516-519
 
See also
 
skin
stroking, 
509
 
, 
510
 
, 
527
techniques, 
509-510
 
, 
527
touching, 
509
 
, 
510
 
, 
527
palpitations, 
322
 
, 
325-326
 
, 
385
 
, 
666-667
case history, 
325-326
 
, 
1014
Heart-Blood deficiency, case history, 
1014
panic attacks, case history, 
385
papules
eruptions, 
71
 
, 
174
 
, 
573
nose, 
90
 
, 
598-599
skin on body, 
177-178
 
, 
178
vs
 
vesicles/macules, 
958
paralysis, 
61-62
 
, 
710-711
2656
facial (Bell’s palsy), 
60-61
 
, 
573
hemiplegia, 
64
legs, 
160
 
, 
695
limbs, 
154-155
 
, 
155
 
, 
676-677
motor-neurone disease, 
61
multiple sclerosis, 
62
pathogenic factors
Chinese terms, 
1066
Cold, 
946-947
Dampness, 
948-950
Deficiency–Excess conditions, 
1023
Dryness, 
950-951
Fire, 
951-952
pattern identification, 
939-952
residual 
See
 
residual pathogenic factors
Summer-Heat, 
948
Wind, 
943-946
patient expressions, 
239
patient questioning 
See
 
interrogation;
 
questions
pattern identification, 
873-1009
Blood, 
930-932
Body Fluids, 
927-933
combined Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang, 
874-875
 
, 
932-933
Eight Principles, 
875
 
, 
981
 
, 
983-991
interior/exterior, 
984-985
Five Elements, 
875
 
, 
982
 
, 
1007-1009
 
See also
 
Five Elements
internal organs, 
874
 
, 
877-926
bladder, 
925-926
2657
Gall-Bladder, 
917-919
Heart, 
879-883
heart, 
879-883
Large Intestine, 
921-923
Liver, 
891-898
Lung(s), 
899-904
Small Intestine, 
911-912
Spleen, 
885-889
Stomach, 
913-916
interrogation, 
242
 
, 
242
pathogenic factors, 
875
 
, 
939-940
 
, 
943-952
Cold, 
946-947
Dampness, 
948-950
Dryness, 
950-951
Fire, 
951-952
pattern identification, 
939-952
Summer-Heat, 
948
Wind, 
943-946
Qi, 
929-930
Three Burners, 
875
 
, 
940
 
, 
941
 
, 
969-971
Yang, 
932
Yin, 
932
pattern identification, Eight Extraordinary Channels, 
981
 
, 
997-1006
combined Directing/Penetrating Vessel, 
999-1003
Directing Vessel 
(Ren Mai)
 
, 
998
Girdle Vessel 
(Dai Mai)
 
, 
1003-1004
Governing Vessel 
(Du Mai)
 
, 
997-998
2658
Penetrating Vessel 
(Chong Mai)
 
, 
998-999
Yang Heel Vessel 
(Yang Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yang Linking Vessel 
(Yang Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
Yin Heel Vessel 
(Yin Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Linking Vessel 
(Yin Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
pattern identification, Four Levels, 
875
 
, 
940
 
, 
941
 
, 
953-964
Blood level, 
957
Defensive Qi level, 
954-955
Latent Heat, 
958-962
Nutritive Qi level, 
956
Qi level, 
955-956
pattern identification, Six Stages, 
875
 
, 
940
 
, 
941
 
, 
965-968
Bright-Yang stage, 
961-962
Greater Yang stage, 
965-967
Greater Yin stage, 
967
Lesser-Yang stage, 
967
Lesser Yin stage, 
968
Terminal-Yin stage, 
968
pattern identification, Twelve Channels, 
981
 
, 
993-996
bladder, 
995
gall-bladder, 
996
heart, 
994
kidneys, 
995
large intestine, 
993-994
liver, 
996
lungs, 
993
pericardium, 
995
small intestine, 
994-995
2659
spleen, 
994
stomach, 
994
Triple Burner, 
995-996
P-6 Neiguan, 
664
PE-8 Laogong, 
534-535
 
, 
535
peau d’orange skin (breasts), 
852
pecking bird pulse, 
507
Penetrating Vessel 
(Chong Mai)
 
, 
998-999
abdomen, 
145
 
, 
146
lateral-lower region, 
515-516
umbilical region, 
515
area under xyphoid process, 
328-329
 
, 
329
 
, 
513
Blood stasis in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1000
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
 
, 
122
 
, 
513
chest, 
143
Damp-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
860
 
, 
1001
Directing and Penetrating Vessel disharmony, 
376
 
, 
851
Directing and Penetrating Vessels deficient and cold, 
999-1000
Directing and Penetrating Vessels Empty, 
999
Directing and Penetrating Vessels unstable, 
999
disharmony of, 
376
Empty-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001
Full-Cold in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001-1002
Full-Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1000-1001
genitalia, 
149
mouth, 
93
 
, 
94
Rebellious Qi 
See
 
Rebellious Qi in Penetrating Vessel
Stagnant Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001
 
See also
2660
Directing and Penetrating Vessels
Penetrating Vessel and Directing Vessels deficient and cold, 
742
Penetrating Vessel and Directing Vessels disharmony, 
376
 
, 
851
acne, 
569
 
, 
784
feeling of heat in face, 
302
itching around mouth, 
611
urticaria, 
784
penis
glans, redness and swelling, 
150
long, in children, 
150
 
, 
872
pain and itching, 
771
Peyronie’s disease, 
150
 
, 
772
priapism, 
150
 
, 
768-769
redness and swelling, 
150
 
, 
772
soft and withered, 
150
 
, 
771-772
ulcers on, 
150
 
, 
772-773
 
See also
 
genitalia
pensiveness, 
424
 
, 
424
Pericardium
channels, 
995
Heat, 
956
 
, 
970
Pericardium channel
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
palpation, 
534-535
 
, 
535
blood vessel, 
534
skin, 
534-535
period pain 
See
 
menstrual pain
periods 
See
 
menstruation
Peyronie’s disease, 
150
 
, 
772
pharynx, 
311
2661
dryness, 
111
erosion, 
111
 
, 
602-603
observation, 
110-111
red, 
110-111
 
, 
602-603
signs, 
111
swelling, 
111
 
, 
602
ulcers, 
111
 
See also
 
throat
philtrum
abnormal colour, 
102
 
, 
625-626
channels, 
101
fertility, 
101
 
, 
102
flat, 
102
 
, 
102
 
, 
625
observation, 
101-102
shape, 
102
stiff, 
102
 
, 
102
 
, 
625
symptoms and signs, 
625-626
Phlegm
Blood stasis and 
See
 
Blood stasis with Phlegm
breast distension, 
849
breast lumps, 
851
chest symptoms, 
321-322
Cold 
See
 
Cold-Phlegm
cold hands and feet, 
672
Cold-Phlegm, clinical manifestations, 
936
Cold-Phlegm in the Lungs, 
902
concentration difficulties, 
804
confusing/complicated conditions, 
1020
contraction of limbs, 
677
2662
cough, 
322
 
, 
323
Damp-Phlegm 
See
 
Damp-Phlegm
Damp-Phlegm in the Lungs, 
902
 
, 
976
Dampness and Phlegm in Uterus, 
1002
dark sclera, 
636
difficulty in finding words, 
822
digestive symptoms, 
262
dizziness, 
295
 
, 
559
Dry-Phlegm, clinical manifestations, 
936
excess wax production, 
583
excessive pubic hair, 
860
fainting, 
560
fever in cancer, 
816
Food-Phlegm, clinical manifestations, 
936
Gallbladder, 
937
goitre, 
315
greasy hair, 
567
head, feeling of heaviness, 
297
headache, 
238
 
, 
290
 
, 
291
 
, 
293
in joints, 
937
thin and brittle nails, 
689
Kidney deficiency with, 
706
Liver-Blood deficiency with Phlegm, 
895
Liver-Qi stagnation with 
See
 
Liver-Qi stagnation with Phlegm
Liver-Wind harbouring Phlegm, 
895
Liver-Wind with 
See
 
Liver-Wind and Phlegm
menopausal syndrome, 
856
2663
muzziness (fuzziness) of head, 
563
nasal voice, 
821
numbness/tingling of hands, 
683
pattern identification, 
936-938
Phlegm-Fluids, 
937
Phlegm in the channels, 
937
Phlegm misting Heart, 
937
Qi-Phlegm, 
936
Qi stagnation and 
See
 
Qi stagnation with Phlegm
residual pathogenic factors, 
976-977
Shock-Phlegm, 
937
slurred speech, 
821
Spleen-Qi deficiency with, somnolence, 
810
sticky/metallic taste, 
728
stuffiness feeling under Heart, 
666
thickening of nails, 
688
in throat, 
603-604
tongue diagnosis, 
230
Turbid 
See
 
Turbid Phlegm
ulcers on neck, 
789
Wine-Phlegm, 
938
withered and brittle nails, 
690
yellow nails, 
691
Phlegm accumulation, 
837
Phlegm and Blood stasis in Lower Burner, 
872
Phlegm and Blood stasis in Middle Burner, 
744-745
Phlegm and retention of food, 
744
Phlegm-Dryness in Lungs, 
902-903
2664
acupuncture, 
903
clinical manifestations, 
902-903
prescription, 
903
Phlegm-Fire
hemiplegia, 
711
hyperactivity, 
805
Phlegm-Fire affecting Heart, 
799
Phlegm-Fire harassing Heart, 
882
acupuncture, 
882
anxiety, 
800
bipolar disorder, 
388
clinical manifestations, 
882
depression, 
798
excess joy, 
794
excessive dreaming, 
808-809
inappropriate laughter, 
795
incoherent speech, 
821
insomnia, 
808
painful tongue, 
614
palpitations under the Heart, 
667
prescription, 
882
schizophrenia, 
802
startled easily, 
793
Phlegm-Fire harassing Mind, 
840
Phlegm-Fire harassing upwards, 
841
Phlegm-Fire in Stomach, 
808-809
Phlegm-Fluids
bluish-greenish nose, 
590
clinical manifestations, 
937
2665
pale nose, 
589
stuffiness feeling under Heart, 
666
yellow nose, 
590
Phlegm-Fluids in abdomen, 
742
Phlegm-Fluids in chest and hypochondrium, 
668
 
, 
738
Phlegm-Fluids in Lungs, 
903
acupuncture, 
903
chest protruding on one side, 
669
chest sunken on one side, 
669
chronic cough, 
660
clinical manifestations, 
903
prescription, 
903
Phlegm-Fluids in Lungs with Blood stasis, 
669
Phlegm-Fluids in Stomach, 
738
Phlegm-Fluids obstructing Heart, 
667
Phlegm-Heat
case histories, 
1022
chest pain with sputum, 
324
clinical manifestations, 
936
convulsions in children, 
871
dark eyelids, 
638
facial pain, 
571
greasy skin, 
781-782
hot and painful eyes, 
632
nodules under skin, 
788
red sclera, 
635
spontaneous sweating, 
775
stagnation of the Gall Bladder with, 
918-919
voice loss, 
840-841
2666
Wind and, phlegm in throat, 
604
Phlegm-Heat in Heart, 
1016-1017
Heart feeling vexed, 
665
staring, fixed eyes, 
650
sudden blindness, 
631
Phlegm-Heat in Liver, sudden blindness, 
631
Phlegm-Heat in Lungs, 
373
 
, 
902
 
, 
976-977
aching nose, 
595
acupuncture, 
902
acute cough, 
659
bad smell sensation, 
597
breathlessness, 
661-662
chest pain, 
663
clinical manifestations, 
902
 
, 
976-977
 
, 
977
cough in children, 
865
cough in pregnancy, 
840
coughing blood, 
661
flapping of nostrils, 
870
foul breath, 
729
prescription, 
902
snoring, 
811
 
, 
821
spoon-shaped fingers, 
687
sticky/metallic taste, 
728
thirst, 
732
wheezing, 
662
Phlegm-Heat in muscles, muscle ache in limbs, 
671
Phlegm-Heat in Stomach
dry mouth, 
733
2667
epigastric pain, 
737
Phlegm-Heat in Stomach and Heart, 
794
Phlegm-Heat in the Lungs, 
902
Phlegm-Heat obstructing Spleen, 
640-641
Phlegm-Heat rising, 
564
Phlegm in channels, 
937
cold hands, 
680
numbness/tingling, 
712
Phlegm in Gallbladder, 
937
Phlegm in Interior, 
814
Phlegm in joints, 
676
 
, 
937
Phlegm in Kidneys, 
937
Phlegm in Limbs
heaviness feeling in limbs, 
674
numbness/tingling in limbs, 
673
Phlegm in Lower Burner, cold feet, 
694
Phlegm in Lungs
chest, feeling of oppression/tightness, 
324
chronic, protruding chest, 
668
nose polyps, 
598
oppression feeling in chest, 
664
protruding sternum, 
669
pulsation of carotid artery, 
655
snoring, 
821
white specks on sclera or pupil, 
647
Phlegm in Lungs and Spleen
distension feeling in eyes, 
642
strabismus, 
629
Phlegm in Lungs with Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency, snoring, 
811
Phlegm in Stomach, abdominal pain, 
736
2668
Phlegm misting Heart, 
937
Phlegm misting Mind, 
882
Phlegm obstructing clear orifices, 
603-604
Phlegm obstructing Heart, 
614
Phlegm obstructing Middle Burner, 
888
Phlegm obstructing Mind orifices, 
821
Phlegm obstructing Spleen, large abdomen, 
745
Phlegm obstructing Stomach
nausea, 
723
poor appetite, 
720
vomiting, 
724
Phlegm obstructing Uterus, scanty periods, 
828
Phlegm patterns, 
882
Phlegm under skin, 
937
Phlegm with Blood stasis, 
937
Phlegm with Lung-Qi stagnation
breast distension, 
850
breast lumps, 
851
physique 
See
 
body build (physique)
Pi
 
(‘feeling of stuffiness’), 
736
Ping Wei San
 
, 
1037
pinworms, 
869
 
See also
 
worm infestation
placenta, retention of, 
843
plaque
skin, 
177-178
 
, 
plate 21.4
teeth, 
100
 
, 
617
pleuritis, heartbeat displacement, 
128
plucking of veins of inner leg, 
1056-1057
Plum Stone Syndrome, 
314
points/channels, Chinese terms, 
1064
polycystic ovary syndrome, 
407
 
, 
1022
polyps, nose, 
90
 
, 
598
2669
Pool Rampart, 
79
poor memory, 
803-804
post-natal depression/psychosis, 
847
Postnatal Qi, 
261
abdomen, 
146
postviral fatigue syndrome
aches, 
317-318
pulse and clinical application, 
457-458
residual pathogenic factors, 
974
tiredness, 
286
pregnancy, 
406-408
 
, 
837-842
abdominal pain, 
838
anxiety, 
840
aversion to food, 
721
breech presentation, 
842
childbirth, 
408
 
, 
408
constipation, 
839-840
convulsions, 
841
cough, 
840
dizziness, 
840
eclampsia, 
841
epileptic attacks during, 
155-156
feeling of suffocation, 
841
fertility, 
406-408
gynaecological symptoms and signs, 
837-842
hoarse voice, 
543
 
, 
820
lips abnormal colour, 
95-96
 
, 
96
 
, 
624
loss of voice, 
840-841
2670
miscarriage
habitual, 
842
threatened, 
84
morning sickness, 
406
 
, 
837-838
oedema during, 
406
 
, 
838
problems during, 
837-842
problems with fetus, 
841-842
slow fetal growth, 
842
pulse, 
451
urination problems, 
839
vaginal bleeding, 
838
 
See also
 
childbirth;
 
childbirth,
 
postpartum
problems
premature ejaculation, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
766-767
premenstrual symptoms, 
404-406
 
, 
405
 
, 
406
breast distension, 
398
 
, 
399
 
, 
832-833
 
, 
1016
constipation, 
405
 
, 
834
diarrhoea, 
405
headaches, 
405
insomnia, 
405
 
, 
835
nausea, 
405
premenstrual tension, 
404-405
case histories, tongue/pulse diagnosis, 
244-246
pulse clinical application, 
458
symptoms and signs, 
831-832
water retention, 
405
 
See also
 
menstruation;
 
menstruation,
 
problem
symptoms
prenatal constitution, body shape, 
22
 
, 
23
 
, 
23
Prenatal Qi, abdomen, 
146
priapism, 
150
 
, 
768-769
2671
prognosis determination, complexion colours, 
47-49
prolapse
anal, 
762
uterus, 
859
vagina, 
151
 
, 
859
prostatic hypertrophy, hand lines, 
135
prostatitis, hand lines, 
135
protruding eyeball, 
82
 
, 
83
 
, 
642-643
psoriasis
with bright-red plaques, 
plate 21.29
differential diagnosis, 
184
 
, 
184
occurrence, 
183
with pale and dry-scaly plaques, 
plate 21.31
with pale plaques, 
plate 21.28
pathology and diagnosis
Chinese, 
184
 
, 
184-185
Western, 
183
 
, 
183-184
 
, 
184
with purple lesions, 
plate 21.30
pustular, 
plate 21.26
scalp, 
plate 21.27
with scaly plaques, 
plate 21.25
symptoms and signs, 
783
types, 
183
 
, 
183-184
psychosis, post-natal depression, 
847
pterygium, 
646
puberty, emotional problems and overwork, 
416-417
pubic hair
excessive, 
150
 
, 
773-774
 
, 
860
loss of, 
150
 
, 
773
 
, 
860
2672
pulse, method of taking, 
446-449
equalizing breathing, 
447
fingers
arranging, 
447-448
five movements, 
448-449
moving, 
448-449
pushing, 
449
 
, 
456
 
, 
457
rolling, 
448
 
, 
448
 
, 
449
 
, 
456-457
leveling the arm, 
446-447
 
, 
447
time, 
446
pulse diagnosis, 
237
 
, 
433-464
accuracy in, 
461
acupuncturist’s and herbalist’s perspective, 
444
acute 
vs
 
chronic conditions, 
445
anger, 
452
 
, 
458
assignment of position to organs, 
438-445
Classic of Difficulties, 
438-439
 
, 
439
 
, 
440
different authors on, 
438
 
, 
439
Golden Mirror of Medicine, 
439
 
, 
441-442
 
, 
442
modern China, 
442-443
Pulse Classic, 
439
 
, 
439-441
Study of the Pulse from Pin Hu Lake, 
439
 
, 
441
blood, state of, 
434
 
, 
455
 
, 
463
cancer, 
462-463
case histories, 
457
 
, 
459
 
, 
460
case history, 
1020
Classic of Difficulties, 
435-436
2673
clinching a diagnosis, 
457
clinical application, 
457-463
acute 
vs
 
chronic conditions, 
445
clinical presentation of symptoms
absence of, 
461-462
disharmonies indicated beyond, 
461
deep level, 
445
 
, 
445-446
 
, 
446
Deficiency and Excess differentiation, 
457-458
in cancer, 
462
emotional problems, 
458-459
 
, 
459
epigastric pain, 
330
external and internal, interpretation, 
443
 
, 
443
Foot position, submerging Yin, 
452-453
Foot section, 
436-437
 
, 
437
 
, 
438
front, middle and rear sections, 
437
Gate section, 
436-437
 
, 
437
 
, 
438
Yang and Yin boundary, 
452-453
heart problems, 
459-460
Heart-Qi reflection, 
445
historical aspects, 
1051-1055
Inch section, 
436-437
 
, 
437
 
, 
438
emerging Yang, 
452-453
integration with interrogation, 
243-248
interpretation, 
445
limitations, 
464
Lower Burner 
See
 
Lower Burner
method of taking, 
435
2674
Middle Burner 
See
 
Middle Burner
middle level, 
445
 
, 
445-446
 
, 
446
nine regions, 
434
 
, 
434-435
organ and pattern disharmony, 
434
organ problems, 
457
 
, 
459
postviral fatigue syndrome, 
457-458
premenstrual tension, 
458
pressure application, 
445
 
, 
446
Qi state, 
434
 
, 
455
radial artery, 
436
 
, 
436
reconciling different arrangements, 
443-445
sadness and grief, 
452
 
, 
459
significance, 
434
 
, 
444-445
skills required, 
434
small and large intestine, discrepancies, 
444
subjections to, 
464
superficial level, 
445
 
, 
445-446
 
, 
446
three levels, 
445
 
, 
445-446
 
, 
446
feeling, 
455
 
, 
455
three sections, 
436-437
 
, 
438
Tongue diagnosis, integration, 
463-464
Toxic Heat, 
462
 
, 
463
treatment principle determination, 
458
Upper Burner 
See
 
Upper Burner
Yellow Emperor’s Internal Classic, 
434
 
, 
434-435
Yin and Yang organs reflection, 
443-444
 
See also
 
Yang;
 
Yin
pulse interpretation guidelines, 
454-457
2675
feeling overall quality, 
456
feeling quality, strength and level, 
456-457
feeling with three fingers, 
454
pulse rate counting, 
457
spirit, Stomach-Qi and root feeling, 
454
three levels feeling, 
455
 
, 
455
three positions, feeling together and individually, 
454
pulse positions, Chinese terms, 
1064
pulse qualities, 
465-508
ACE inhibitors on, 
508
antidepressants, 
507-508
apical, 
512
arrangement of, 
466
 
, 
467
basic eight, 
467-479
beta blockers, 
508
boiling cauldron, 
506
bouncing stone, 
507
Chinese terms, 
1064
circling fish, 
506-507
classification, 
496-498
basic eight, 
496
different aspects for, 
497
Eight Principles, 
497-498
Four Levels patterns, 
498
 
, 
498
 
, 
605
Qi, blood and body fluids patterns, 
497
Six Stages patterns, 
498
 
, 
498
 
, 
605
Triple Burner patterns, 
499
complete set of, 
466
 
, 
467
2676
dangerous conditions indication, 
506-507
diuretics, 
508
drugs effect on, 
507-508
 
, 
508
empty type, 
479-485
external pathogens, 
468
factors affecting, 
449-451
 
, 
451
age, 
450
 
, 
461
body build, 
450-451
Fan Guan Mai, 
451
gender, 
550
 
, 
550
menstruation, 
451
pregnancy, 
451
season, 
449
 
, 
449-450
short term, 
446
Xie Fei Mai, 
451
feeling and identifying, 
466-467
full type, 
485-491
in cancer, 
462
elderly, 
461
H
2
 
-receptor antagonists, 
508
Insulin, 
508
leaking roof, 
507
non-traditional, 
494-496
normal attributes, 
451-453
 
, 
452
 
, 
454
root, 
452-535
 
See also
 
root
spirit, 
451
 
See also
 
spirit
Stomach-Qi, 
451-452
 
See also
 
Stomach-Qi
2677
wave qualities, 
452-453
 
, 
453
pecking bird, 
507
positions, 
499-506
left front (Heart), 
500
 
, 
500-501
 
, 
501
left middle (Liver), 
501
 
, 
501-502
 
, 
502
left rear (Kidneys), 
502
 
, 
502-503
 
, 
503
right front (Lungs), 
503
 
, 
503-504
 
, 
504
right middle (Stomach and Spleen), 
504
 
, 
504-505
 
, 
505
right rear (Small Intestine and Kidneys), 
506
 
, 
506
rate counting, 
457
sesame seed hasty, 
507
spinning bean, 
507
swimming shrimp, 
507
terminology of, 
498
 
, 
499
tranquillizers and hypnotics, 
507
umbilical, 
515
 
, 
515
untying rope, 
507
upturned knife, 
507
warfarin on, 
508
without wave, 
452
 
, 
459
 
See also
 
pulse qualities, 
individual attribute;
symptoms and signs
pulse qualities, Big, 
488-489
clinical manifestations, 
489
clinical significance, 
488
combinations, 
489
description, 
488
differentiation of similar pulses, 
489
with strength, 
488-489
2678
without strength, 
489
pulse qualities, Choppy
clinical significance, 
478
 
, 
478
combinations, 
478
description, 
477-478
 
, 
478
differentiation of similar pulses, 
478-479
heart problems, 
460
left front (Heart) position, 
501
position significance, 
479
pulse qualities, Deep, 
462
 
, 
469-470
clinical significance, 
470
combinations, 
470
description, 
469-470
differentiation of similar pulses, 
470
full and weak differentiation, 
470
left middle (Liver) position, 
501
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
502
position significance, 
470
pulse qualities, Empty, 
474-475
clinical significance, 
474-475
 
, 
475
combinations, 
475
description, 
474
differentiation of similar pulses, 
475
position significance, 
446
 
, 
475
pulse qualities, Fine, 
480
clinical significance, 
480
 
, 
480
combinations, 
480
description, 
480
2679
differentiation of similar pulses, 
480
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
503
position significance, 
480
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
pulse qualities, Firm, 
489-490
clinical significance, 
489
 
, 
489
combinations, 
489
definition, 
445-446
 
, 
497
description, 
489
differentiation of similar pulses, 
489-490
pulse qualities, Floating, 
445
 
, 
467-469
clinical significance, 
467-468
combinations, 
468-469
description, 
467
differentiation of similar pulses, 
469
Empty, 
445
 
, 
455
 
, 
468
 
, 
469
exterior conditions, 
468
interior conditions, 
468-469
left front (Heart) position, 
500-501
left middle (Liver) position, 
501
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
502
position significance, 
469
right front (Lungs) position, 
504
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
right rear (Small Intestine and Kidneys) position, 
506
Western disease conditions, 
469
 
, 
469
pulse qualities, Full, 
475-476
combinations, 
476
2680
common conditions manifesting, 
476
 
, 
476
description, 
475
differentiation of similar pulses, 
476
position significance, 
476
pulse qualities, Hasty, 
492
clinical significance, 
492
 
, 
492
combinations, 
492
description, 
492
differentiation of similar pulses, 
492
pulse qualities, Hidden, 
483-484
clinical significance, 
483-484
 
, 
484
combinations, 
484
description, 
483
differentiation of similar pulses, 
484
position significance, 
484
pulse qualities, Hollow, 
482
clinical significance, 
482
 
, 
482
combinations, 
482
description, 
482
differentiation of similar pulses, 
482
left front (Heart) position, 
501
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
503
right front (Lungs) position, 
504
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
pulse qualities, Hurried, 
492-493
clinical significance, 
492-493
 
, 
493
combinations, 
493
description, 
492
2681
differentiation of similar pulses, 
493
pulse qualities, Intermittent, 
493-494
clinical significance, 
493
 
, 
493
combinations, 
493
description, 
493
differentiation of similar pulses, 
494
pulse qualities, Irregular, 
494-495
clinical significance, 
494
 
, 
495
combinations, 
495
description, 
494
differentiation of similar pulses, 
495
heart disharmony, 
445
 
, 
459-460
rate or rhythm, 
491-494
 
, 
497
pulse qualities, Knotted
clinical significance, 
491
 
, 
491
combinations, 
491-492
description, 
460
 
, 
491
differentiation of similar pulses, 
492
with strength, 
491
without strength, 
491
pulse qualities, Leather
clinical significance, 
483
 
, 
483
combinations, 
483
description, 
482-483
 
, 
497
differentiation of similar pulses, 
483
pulse qualities, Long, 
490
clinical significance, 
490
 
, 
490
combinations, 
490
2682
description, 
490
differentiation of similar pulses, 
490
wave flow, 
453
pulse qualities, Minute
clinical significance, 
480
 
, 
480
combinations, 
481
differentiation of similar pulses, 
481
heart problems, 
460
position significance, 
481
pulse description, 
480
pulse qualities, Moving, 
490-491
clinical significance, 
490-491
 
, 
491
combinations, 
491
description, 
490
differentiation of similar pulses, 
491
pulse qualities, Overflowing, 
487-488
clinical significance, 
487
 
, 
488
combinations, 
488
description, 
487
differentiation of similar pulses, 
488
emotional problems, 
458
left front (Heart) position, 
500
left middle (Liver) position, 
502
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
503
position significance, 
488
right front (Lungs) position, 
504
with strength, 
487
Toxic Heat, 
463
2683
without strength, 
488
pulse qualities, Rapid, 
472-474
clinical significance, 
472-474
combinations, 
474
common conditions manifesting, 
473
 
, 
473
description, 
472
differentiation of similar pulses, 
474
emotional problems, 
458-459
heat and non-heat reasons for, 
473-474
 
, 
473-474
position significance, 
474
tongue not red with, 
463
Toxic Heat, 
462
 
, 
463
pulse qualities, Sad, 
495-496
clinical significance, 
496
 
, 
496
combinations, 
496
description, 
495-496
differentiation of similar pulses, 
496
position significance, 
496
pulse qualities, Scattered, 
484-485
clinical significance, 
484
 
, 
484
combinations, 
484
description, 
484
 
, 
497
differentiation of similar pulses, 
484-485
heart problems, 
460
position significance, 
485
pulse qualities, Short, 
481-482
clinical significance, 
481-482
 
, 
482
combinations, 
482
2684
description, 
481
differentiation of similar pulses, 
482
left front (Heart) position, 
500
wave flow, 
453
pulse qualities, Slippery, 
457
 
, 
460
 
, 
462
 
, 
476-477
clinical significance, 
476-477
 
, 
477
combinations, 
477
common conditions manifesting, 
476
description, 
476
differentiation of similar pulses, 
477
left front (Heart) position, 
501
left middle (Liver) position, 
501-502
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
502
position significance, 
477
right front (Lungs) position, 
504
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
right rear (Small Intestine and Kidneys) position, 
506
pulse qualities, Slow, 
470-472
clinical significance, 
470-471
cold conditions and heat symptoms, 
471
 
, 
471
combinations, 
472
common conditions manifesting, 
471
 
, 
471
contradictory manifestations, 
471
 
, 
471
description, 
470
differentiation of similar pulses, 
472
jogging, 
471-472
life situations causing, 
472
 
, 
472
position significance, 
472
2685
tongue red with, 
463
pulse qualities, Slowed-down, 
494
clinical significance, 
494
 
, 
494
combinations, 
494
description, 
494
pulse qualities, Soggy (Weak-Floating)
clinical significance, 
481
 
, 
481
combinations, 
481
description, 
481
 
, 
497
differentiation of similar pulses, 
481
position significance, 
481
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
pulse qualities, Stagnant, 
495
clinical significance, 
495
 
, 
495
combinations, 
495
description, 
495
differentiation of similar pulses, 
495
position significance, 
495
pulse qualities, Tight, 
486-487
clinical significance, 
486
 
, 
486
combinations, 
486-487
description, 
486
differentiation of similar pulses, 
487
position significance, 
487
pulse qualities, Weak, 
479
clinical significance, 
479
 
, 
479
combinations, 
479
description, 
479
2686
differentiation of similar pulses, 
479
left front (Heart) position, 
500
left rear (Kidneys) position, 
502-503
levels, 
445
position significance, 
479
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
right rear (Small Intestine and Kidneys) position, 
506
pulse qualities, Wiry, 
485-486
clinical significance, 
485
 
, 
485
combinations, 
485-486
description, 
485
differentiation of similar pulses, 
486
elderly, 
461
left front (Heart) position, 
501
left middle (Liver) position, 
502
position significance, 
486
right middle (Stomach and Spleen) position, 
505
right rear (Small Intestine and Kidneys) position, 
506
pupil(s)
bleeding between iris and, 
649
contracted, 
649-650
dilated, 
649
red ring around, 
647-648
white membrane in children, 
648
white specks, 
647
yellow fluid between iris and, 
648-649
 
See also
 
eye(s)
Purple Leg and Teeth Nutritional Impairment Pattern, inflamed gums, 
619
pustules, 
174
 
, 
178
 
, 
178,
 
, 
plate 21.6
2687
Q
Qi
body shape, 
23
 
, 
23-24
 
, 
24
 
, 
24-25
clinical manifestations, 
958
defensive
case history, 
1019-1020
clinical manifestations, 
958
cold, 
367
deficiency, Lungs and Kidneys, wheeze in children, 
865
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
levels, 
954-955
Wind-Heat in Lung Defensive-Qi portion, 
969
Empty-Qi, 
990
nutritive, 
815
 
, 
956
 
, 
958
 
, 
970
pattern identification, 
929-930
pulse diagnosis
feeling levels, 
455
state of, 
434
 
, 
454
 
See also
 
pulse diagnosis
pulse qualities classification, 
497
rebellious 
See
 
entries beginning
 
Rebellious Qi
Rebellious Qi 
See
 
entries beginning
 
Rebellious Qi
role of spleen, 
262
strong postnatal, body shape, 
23
 
, 
23-24
upright, residual pathogenic factors, 
974
 
, 
975
weak postnatal, body shape, 
24
 
, 
24-25
 
see also individual organs
Qi, Original, deficiency
and kidney-Yang deficiency, 
560
2688
urine retention in infants, 
867
Qi and Blood deficiency
atrophy of legs, 
694
carbuncles on neck, 
788
chronic, small or absent lunulae on nails, 
692
clinical manifestations, 
932-933
contraction of scrotum, 
769
corneal opacity, 
647
deviation of the mouth, 
613
drooping eyelids, 
640
dry and brittle hair, 
566
dull-pale palate, 
624
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
eye discharge, 
634
facial pain, 
303
 
, 
571
fear/anxiety, 
792-793
fever during menstruation, 
833
grinding teeth, 
617
hyperopia, 
629-630
indented nails, 
689
limb atrophy, 
674-675
limb paralysis, 
677
limb weakness, 
674
muffled voice, 
820
night vision decreased, 
630
oedema of body, 
713
pain in foot, 
697
2689
pain in limbs, 
672
painful periods, 
829
paralysis, 
710
paralysis of legs, 
695
poor memory, 
803
premature greying, 
565
protruding eyeball, 
643
receding gums, 
307
 
, 
308
 
, 
619
sense of smell loss, 
597
severe
soft neck, 
654
thin neck, 
655
with Toxic Heat, gums oozing pus, 
620
severe and chronic, strabismus, 
629
thickened fingers, 
688
thin abdomen, 
745
thin and brittle nails, 
689
unilateral sweating, 
777-778
Qi and Blood deficiency of Heart, night sweating, 
776
Qi and Blood deficiency of Spleen, pale lips, 
621
Qi and Blood deficiency of Spleen and Heart
brain noise, 
564
dizziness, 
560
Qi and Blood deficiency with Blood stasis, curling nails, 
690
Qi and Blood deficiency with dryness of Blood
coarse and thick nails, 
688
cracked nails, 
688
Qi and Blood deficiency with internal Wind
2690
gait festination, 
695
stepping gait, 
696
unstable gait, 
696
Qi and Phlegm stagnation
depression and manic behaviour, 
798
schizophrenia, 
802
Qi and Yang deficiency of Stomach, swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
726
Qi and Yin collapse, sweating from collapse, 
776
Qi and Yin deficiency
boil on eyelid, 
639
clinical manifestations, 
933
dilated pupils, 
649
hot and painful eyes, 
633
sore throat, 
601
Qi and Yin deficiency of Heart, Heart feeling vexed, 
665
Qi and Yin deficiency of Stomach, regurgitation of food, 
719
Qi and Yin deficiency of Stomach and Spleen, sweet taste, 
727
Qi and Yin deficiency with Toxic Heat, swollen neck glands, 
655
Qi collapse
clinical manifestations, 
929
Lung-Qi collapse, 
903
Qi collapse with deficiency of Blood, collapse after childbirth, 
847
Qi deficiency
amenorrhoea after miscarriage, 
845
breast distension, 
849
breast milk, 
847
breech presentation, 
842
chronic fever, 
374-375
 
, 
815
clinical manifestations, 
929
2691
digestive symptoms, 
262
dizziness in pregnancy, 
840
early (short cycle) periods, 
827
exhaustion 
(Xu Lao)
 
, 
282
headache, 
561
Heart- and Lung-Qi deficiency (deficiency of Gathering-Qi), 
903-
904
heavy periods, 
827
insomnia, 
807
lochia, 
844
low-grade fever in children, 
864
Lung- and Spleen-, Phlegm in the Lungs with, 
811
menstrual clots, 
826
milky nipple discharge, 
851
miscarriage, 
841
nails with white spots, 
691
oedema after childbirth, 
846
pale menstrual blood, 
825
pale philtrum, 
625
paralysis, 
62
post-chemotherapy fever, 
817
severe, weak voice, 
820
slow fetal growth, 
842
small breasts, 
852
Spleen-and Heart-Qi deficiency, somnolence, 
810
Spleen Qi and Spleen-Blood deficiency, 
804
tidal fever, 
816
2692
tongue, 
227
 
, 
230
tremor/spasticity, 
63
watery menstrual blood, 
826
white/pale complexion, 
575
Qi deficiency of Central, 
712
Qi deficiency of Spleen and Heart with floating Yang, hyperactivity, 
804
Qi deficiency with Blood stasis
hemiplegia, 
711
limb flaccidity, 
675
limb oedema, 
676
oedema of the feet, 
694
thigh pain, 
697
Qi deficiency with internal Wind, 
648
Qi Gate, 
194
 
, 
194
Qi Ju Di Huang Wan
 
, 
1037
Qi levels, 
955-956
 
, 
956
Heat in Lungs, 
969-970
Heat 
vs.
 
Fire, 
956
Latent Heat, 
960
Qi obstructed, 
930
clinical manifestations, 
930
Qi oedema, 
179
Qi-Phlegm, clinical manifestations, 
936
Qi Shao (weak breathing), 
545
 
, 
661
Qi sinking, clinical manifestations, 
929
Qi stagnation
abdomen, 
326
abdominal distension (bloating), 
327
abdominal masses, 
856
body aches, 
709
2693
breast distension, 
849
breast lumps, 
851
clinical manifestations, 
929-930
cold hands/feet, 
363-364
 
, 
365
 
, 
672
digestive symptoms, 
262
feeling of cold, 
814
flattening of lumbar spine, 
708
groaning, 
822
infertility (female), 
855
limbs
feeling of distension, 
338
 
, 
338
oedema, 
676
list of spine, 
708
lochia, 
844
menopausal syndrome, 
856
oedema
after childbirth, 
846
body, 
713
limbs, 
676
during menstruation, 
833
in pregnancy, 
838
post-chemotherapy fever, 
817
sore throat, 
602
swollen fingers, 
686
tongue, 
231
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis
abdominal masses (gynaecological symptom), 
856
2694
amenorrhoea, 
829
blocked nose, 
592
bluish-greenish lips, 
622
drooping eyelids, 
640
earache, 
582
herpes zoster, 
786
hip pain, 
697
invasion, elbow pain, 
679
joint pain, 
710
knee pain, 
697
limb rigidity, 
676
numbness/tingling, 
712
of hands, 
683
in limbs, 
673
oedema of body, 
713
oedema of the feet, 
693
pain in hands, 
682
scarring after corneal opacity, 
647
sciatica, 
704
shoulder ache, 
656
stiff knees, 
699
stiffness of lower back, 
705
ulcers on lower leg, 
701
upper backache, 
656
yawning, 
670
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in Bladder channel, haemorrhoids, 
762
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in descending branch of Penetrating Vessel, thigh pain,
697
2695
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in Liver channel, groin pain, 
698
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in Penetrating Vessel, 
697
 
, 
740
Qi stagnation and Blood stasis in Uterus, purple menstrual blood, 
825
Qi stagnation in Bladder, abdominal pain - central, lower, 
739
Qi stagnation in Intestines, difficulty in defecation, 
751
Qi stagnation in Lower Burner, swelling and pain in testicles, 
773
Qi stagnation in Stomach and Intestines, umbilical pain, 
738
Qi stagnation with Dampness
distended abdominal veins, 
743
distension feeling in limbs, 
674
Qi stagnation with deficiency of Blood and Kidneys, feeling of suffocation, 
841
Qi stagnation with disharmony of Liver and Spleen, feeling of suffocation, 
841
Qi stagnation with Phlegm
abdominal pain (area below xyphoid process), 
737
goitre, 
604
menopausal syndrome, 
856
obstruction feeling in throat, 
607
premenstrual breast distension, 
832
in Stomach, regurgitation of food, 
718
trembling mouth, 
612
wide neck, 
655
Qi transportation sites, Yin organs relationship, 
4
Qi Zhong
 
, 
179
Qing
 
, 
175
Qing E Wan
 
, 
1037
Qing Gan Tou Ding Tang
 
, 
1037
Qing Gu San
 
, 
1037
Qing Hai Wan
 
, 
1038
Qing Hao Bie Jia Tang
 
, 
1038
Qing Jing San
 
, 
1038
Qing Luo Yin
 
, 
1038
2696
Qing Qi Hua Tan Tang
 
, 
1038
Qing Re An Tai Yin
 
, 
1038
Qing Re Gu Jing Tang
 
, 
1038
Qing Re Tiao Xue Tang
 
, 
1038-1039
Qing Wei San
 
, 
1039
Qing Ying Tang
 
, 
1039
Qing Zao Jiu Fei Tang
 
, 
1039
Qing Zao Run Chang Tang
 
, 
1039
Qiu Zhen
 
, 
177
Qu Tiao Tang
 
, 
1039
questions
Simple Questions, complexion colours, 
47
16 questions, 
250-251
10 traditional questions, 
249-250
limitations, 
249
 
See also
 
interrogation
Quivering tongue, 
219
2697
R
Rapid pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
rash(es), skin, 
180
 
, 
180
 
, 
319
 
, 
869-870
 
, 
953-954
Rebellious Liver Qi, 
892
clinical manifestations, 
892
 
, 
930
prescription, 
892
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading Spleen, 
897
acupuncture, 
897
clinical manifestations, 
897
 
, 
930
prescription, 
897
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading Stomach
acupuncture, 
897
clinical manifestations, 
897
 
, 
930
prescription, 
897
Rebellious Lung-Qi (Lung-Qi not descending), protruding eyeball, 
643
Rebellious Qi
clinical manifestations, 
930
digestive symptoms, 
262
Rebellious-Qi breathing (Shang Qi), 
545
 
, 
661
Rebellious Qi in Penetrating Vessel, 
238
abdomen, 
328
abdominal pain (area below xyphoid process), 
736
affecting Heart, palpitations, 
666
breathlessness, 
662
chest, feeling of oppression/tightness, 
324
 
, 
324
 
, 
664
chest pain, 
663
energy rising feeling in abdomen, 
742
headache after orgasm, 
394
2698
pain with a distressing feeling, 
256
palpitations under the Heart, 
667
panic attacks, 
385
in pregnancy, aversion to food, 
721
pulsation feeling under umbilicus, 
742
stuffiness feeling under Heart, 
666
recreational drugs, 
429-430
redness on, 
110
 
, 
607-608
regurgitation
sour, 
267
 
, 
718
symptoms and signs, 
718-719
Ren-3 Zhongji, 
522
Ren-4 Guanyuan, 
521-522
Ren-5 Shimen, 
522
Ren-12 Zhongwan, 
521
Ren-14 Juque, 
521
Ren-17 Shanzhong
chest tenderness, 
512
palpation, 
522
Ren Shen Bu Fei Tang
 
, 
1039
residual, in Diaphragm, insomnia, 
808
Residual Damp-Heat invasion in Lesser-Yang channels, ear problems in children, 
865
Residual Damp-Heat with Qi deficiency, swollen neck glands, 
655
Residual dryness and Phlegm in Lungs, 
660
Residual dryness in Lungs, 
660
Residual Heat in Diaphragm
Heart feeling vexed, 
665-666
heat feeling in chest, 
665
insomnia, 
808
Residual Heat in Lungs, low-grade fever in children, 
864
residual pathogenic factors, 
973-979
2699
diagnosis, 
975
disturbed sleep, 
868
effects, 
975
 
, 
976
formation, 
973-975
 
, 
974
phlegm, 
976-977
tongue signs, 
976
treatment, 
975-976
types, 
975
 
, 
979
upright Qi, 
974
 
, 
975
Residual Phlegm in Lungs with Lung-Qi deficiency, wheeze in children, 
865
Residual Phlegm in Lungs with Spleen-Qi deficiency, wheeze in children, 
865
respiratory problems
asthma
in children, 
865
retching, 
725
rheumatoid arthritis, withered and brittle nails, 
138
rhinitis, 
87
 
, 
592-593
 
See also
 
allergic rhinitis
ribs, pain in, 
324
 
, 
324
 
, 
664
ringworm 
See
 
tinea (ringworm)
Root of Post-Heaven Qi, 
261
root pulse
interpretation, 
454
normal attribute, 
452-453
rosacea, 
plate 21.54,
 
, 
plate 21.55
occurrence, 
189
pathology and diagnosis, 
189
 
, 
189
symptoms and signs, 
785
Rou Fu Bao Yuan Tang
 
, 
1039
roundworms, 
869
 
See also
 
worm infestation
2700
S
Sad pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
sadness, 
387-388
 
, 
424-425
 
, 
425
patterns, 
388
pulse indication, 
452
 
, 
459
symptoms and signs, 
792
salpingitis, hand lines, 
135
salty taste, 
727
San Jia Fu Mai Tang
 
, 
1039
San Miao Hong Teng Tang
 
, 
1040
San Ren Tang
 
, 
1040
San Zi Yang Qin Tang
 
, 
1040
Sang Ju Yin
 
, 
1040
Sang Piao Xiao San
 
, 
1040
Sang Xing Tang
 
, 
1040
scalp
boils, 
70
 
, 
568
dry, 
69
 
, 
568
erosions, 
70
itching, 
287
 
, 
299
 
, 
299
 
, 
567
psoriasis, 
plate 21.27
redness and pain of, 
69
 
, 
568
ulcers, 
70
 
, 
568-569
 
See also
 
head
Scattered pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
schizophrenia, 
802
sciatica, 
704
sclera colour
abnormal, 
81
 
, 
81-82
 
, 
82
 
, 
634-636
bluish-greenish, 
82
 
, 
82
 
, 
635
2701
dark, 
82
 
, 
82
 
, 
636
red, 
81
 
, 
81-82
 
, 
635
white specks, 
82
 
, 
82
 
, 
647
yellow, 
81
 
, 
81
 
, 
634-635
 
See also
 
eye(s)
scoliosis, 
117
 
, 
117
 
, 
707
scrotum
abnormal colour, 
151
contracted, 
150
 
, 
769
dark, 
151
 
, 
771
drooping on one side, 
151
 
, 
769
itching, 
771
loose, 
151
 
, 
769
oozing, 
151
 
, 
770
pale, 
151
 
, 
770
purple, 
151
 
, 
770-771
red, 
151
 
, 
770
swollen, 
151
 
, 
770
 
See also
 
genitalia
Sea of Marrow, Emptiness of 
See
 
Emptiness of Sea of Marrow
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), effect on pulse, 
507
semen (sperm)
blood in, 
768
cold and watery, 
768
sesame seed hasty pulse, 
507
sexual intercourse
bleeding (female), 
859-860
pain (female), 
859
sexual life
patient interrogation, 
250
sexual activity
2702
excessive, 
118-119
 
, 
430
frequency, 
392
sexual problems, 
391-394
anorgasmia, 
393-394
 
See also
 
orgasm
female, 
393-394
impotence 
See
 
erectile dysfunction
lack of libido 
See
 
libido, lack of
male, 
392-393
 
, 
765-774
nocturnal emissions, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
767
premature ejaculation, 
393
 
, 
393
 
, 
766-767
tiredness/dizziness after ejaculation, 
393
 
, 
768
Sha Shen Mai Dong Tang
 
, 
1040
Shang
 
, 
539
Shang Qi
 
(Rebellious-Qi breathing), 
545
 
, 
661
Shao Fu
 
, 
145
 
, 
515
Shao Fu Zhu Yu Tang
 
, 
1040
Shao Yao Tang
 
, 
1040-1041
She Gan Ma Huang Tang
 
, 
1041
Shen
 
, 
31
 
, 
207
 
, 
209
 
, 
451
Shen Fu Tang
 
, 
1041
Shen Ge San
 
, 
1041
Shen Ling Bai Zhu San
 
, 
1041
Shen Qi Si Wu Tang
 
, 
1041
Sheng Hua Tang
 
, 
1041
Sheng Mai San
 
, 
1041
Sheng Yang Tang
 
, 
1041
Sheng Yu Tang
 
, 
1041
Shi Pi Yin
 
, 
1042
Shi Xiao San
 
, 
1042
shingles 
See
 
herpes zoster (shingles)
shivers, 
363
 
, 
365
 
, 
813-814
2703
with sweating, 
353
shock, 
425
 
, 
425
 
, 
1022
affecting Heart, palpitations, 
666
convulsions in children, 
871
crying in children/babies, 
868
disturbed sleep, 
868
Shock-Phlegm, 
937
Short pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
shortness of breath 
(Duan Qi)
 
, 
545
 
, 
661
Shou Tai Wan
 
, 
1042
shoulder(s)
ache, 
656
frozen, 
656
inability to raise, 
341-342
 
, 
342
pain, 
341-342
 
, 
342
problems and channel palpation, 
528
symptoms and signs, 
653-656
 
See also
 
limbs
Shui Dou
 
, 
180
Shui Pao
 
, 
178
Shui Zhong
 
, 
179
SI-16 Tianchuang, 
532
 
, 
532
Si Hai Shu Yu Wan
 
, 
1042
Si Jun Zi Tang
 
, 
1042
Si Mo Tang
 
, 
1042
Si Ni Tang
 
, 
1042
Si Wu Ma Zi Ren Wan
 
, 
1042
Si Wu Tang
 
, 
1042
Sick Sinus Syndrome, 
460
sighing, 
545
 
, 
670
signs and symptoms 
See
 
symptoms and signs
Simple Questions, complexion colours, prognosis, 
47
2704
sinusitis, 
87
 
, 
1017
 
, 
1019
Damp-Heat in Head, 
978
Sick Sinus Syndrome, 
460
Six Stages
Bright-Yang stage, 
961-962
Greater Yang stage, 
965-967
Greater Yin stage, 
967
Lesser-Yang stage, 
967
Lesser Yin stage, 
968
pattern identification, 
939-952
relationship to
Four Levels, 
962
 
, 
963-964
Three Burners, 
962
 
, 
962
 
, 
963-964
Terminal-Yin stage, 
968
skin
acne 
See
 
acne
body hair, 
176
breasts, peau d’orange, 
852
candida 
See
 
candida
carbuncles, 
788
complexion 
See
 
complexion colours
connecting channels, 
174
Cou Li
 
, 
176
cutaneous regions, 
5
Dampness, 
949
 
, 
950
dermographism, 
181
diseases, 
181-190
pathology and diagnosis, 
181-190
 
see also individual diseases
2705
dry, 
178-179
 
, 
179
 
, 
517
 
, 
782
eczema 
See
 
eczema
energetic layers, 
516
 
, 
517
erosion, 
179
 
, 
179
eruptions, 
782-785
menstrual symptoms, 
834
feet 
See
 
feet
fissures, 
180
forearm 
See
 
forearm
forehead 
See
 
forehead
furuncle 
See
 
boils
greasy, 
179
 
, 
517
growths and masses, 
787-789
hands 
See
 
hands
herpes simplex 
See
 
herpes simplex
herpes zoster 
See
 
herpes zoster (shingles)
infections, 
785-787
internal organs influence, 
170-173
 
, 
173
heart, 
173
kidneys, 
172
 
, 
172-173
 
, 
173
liver, 
173
lungs, 
170-172
stomach and spleen, 
172
layers, 
169
 
, 
169-170
lesion types, 
170
 
, 
170-171
lesions/signs, 
plates 21.1-21.22
lustre, 
175
 
See also
 
lustre
2706
macules 
See
 
macules
malignant melanoma 
See
 
malignant melanoma
moisture, 
176
 
, 
517
moles 
See
 
naevi (moles)
nodules under, 
640-641
 
, 
788-789
observation, 
169-190
oedema, 
179
 
, 
179
palpation, 
516-519
 
See also
 
palpation
papules 
See
 
papules
Phlegm under skin, 
937
plaque, 
177-178
psoriasis 
See
 
psoriasis
pustules, 
174
 
, 
178
 
, 
178
rashes, 
180
 
, 
180
 
, 
319
 
, 
785
 
, 
869-870
 
, 
953-954
rosacea 
See
 
rosacea
scales, 
179
 
, 
179
 
, 
181
 
, 
184
 
, 
plates 21.7
signs, 
174-181
space between muscles and, 
176
swelling, 
179
 
, 
179
symptoms and signs, 
781-789
temperature, 
516
 
, 
516
texture, 
175-176
 
, 
517
tinea 
See
 
tinea (ringworm)
ulcers 
See
 
ulcers
urticaria 
See
 
urticaria
vesicles, 
174
 
, 
178
 
, 
178
warts 
See
 
warts
2707
wheals, 
177
 
, 
185
skin colour (body), 
174-175
 
, 
175
bluish-greenish, 
175
dark, 
175
pale, 
174
race variation consideration, 
174
red, 
174
yellow, 
174-175
 
, 
175
sleep
duration, 
347
interrogation, 
347-350
 
See also
 
dreaming;
 
insomnia;
 
sleep problems
sleep problems, 
807-811
in children, 
413
 
, 
868
excessive dreaming 
See
 
dreaming
insomnia 
See
 
insomnia
sleep talking, 
544
 
, 
810
sleep walking, 
810-811
snoring, 
543
 
, 
811
 
, 
821
somnolence, 
349
 
, 
810
 
, 
1022
after eating, 
722-723
Slippery pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Slow pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
slurred speech, 
544
 
, 
821
Small Intestine
channels, 
994-995
Full-Heat, 
911
pattern identification, 
911-912
pulse diagnosis, discrepancies, 
444
2708
right rear pulse position, 
506
 
, 
506
worm infestation, 
912
Small Intestine channel
abdomen, 
145
ears relationship, 
105
 
, 
106
eyes relationship, 
78
palpation, 
532
 
, 
532
blood vessel, 
532
skin, 
532
Small Intestine deficient and Cold, 
912
Small Intestine Qi pain, 
911-912
acupuncture, 
912
clinical manifestations, 
911
prescription, 
912
Small Intestine Qi tied, 
912
smell/smelling (olfaction)
diagnosis by, 
549-552
body odour 
See
 
body odour
breath, 
550
 
, 
550
intestinal gas, 
551
odour of bodily secretions, 
550-551
sputum, 
550
sweat, 
550
urine and stools, 
550-551
vaginal discharge and lochia, 
551
loss of sense, 
306
 
, 
306
 
, 
597-598
yin organs, 
540
 
See also
 
nose
sneezing, 
304
 
, 
304
2709
diagnosis by, 
546
 
, 
546
symptoms and signs, 
591
snoring, 
543
 
, 
811
 
, 
821
 
See also
 
sleep problems
Soggy pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
soles of feet, 
345
 
, 
345
burning sensations, 
345
 
, 
701
pain in, 
345
 
, 
698
somnolence, 
349
 
, 
810
patterns, 
350
 
See also
 
sleep
sore throat, 
110
 
, 
313
 
, 
601-602
external origin, 
312
internal origin, 
312-313
sound, voice 
See
 
voice
sour regurgitation, 
718
patterns, 
267
sour taste, 
727-728
SP-11 Jimen, 
530-531
 
, 
531
SP-12 Chongmen, Spleen channel, 
530-531
 
, 
531
spasticity, limbs, 
62-63
 
, 
156
 
, 
156
speech/talking, 
544
 
, 
544
delirious, 
822
difficulty in finding words, 
822
dislike of, 
544
incoherent, incessant, 
821
sleep, 
544
slurred, 
544
 
, 
821
stuttering, 
543
 
, 
822
 
See also
 
voice
sperm 
See
 
semen (sperm)
spine
bent forward, 
116
 
, 
707-708
2710
childrens muscles along, 
194
coccyx pain, 
705
curve abnormalities, 
116-118
 
, 
118
 
, 
707-708
kyphosis, 
117
 
, 
117-118
 
, 
708
list of, 
118
 
, 
118
 
, 
708
lordosis, 
117
 
, 
117
 
, 
707
lumbar flattening, 
117
 
, 
118
 
, 
708
muscle atrophy along, 
116
 
, 
705
scoliosis, 
117
 
, 
117
 
, 
707
 
See also
 
back
spinning bean pulse, 
507
spirit
aspects of, 
32-33
body/mind relationship, 
32
conditions, 
33-34
false, 
34
strong, 
33-34
weak, 
34
and constitution, 
34-36
strong spirit/strong constitution, 
35
strong spirit/weak constitution, 
36
weak spirit/strong constitution, 
35
weak spirit/weak constitution, 
35
embodiment of, 
32
and emotions, 
36-37
complexion, 
36
eyes, 
36
 
, 
37
 
, 
75
 
, 
80
tongue, 
36
 
, 
37
lustre of, 
33
2711
observation, mind, spirit and emotions, 
31-38
pulse
interpretation, 
454
normal attribute, 
451
tongue spirit, 
207
vitality of, 
32-33
Spleen
abdominal reflection of state, 
146
channels, 
994
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
Dampness, 
977
epigastrium relationship, 
515
Heat in 
See
 
Heat
invasion of Cold, diarrhoea in children, 
865
lunula correspondence, 
140
pattern identification, 
885-889
Postnatal Qi, 
261
Qi deficiency of Spleen and Heart with floating Yang,
hyperactivity, 
804
Qi transformation/transportation, 
262
right middle pulse position, 
504
 
, 
504-505
 
, 
505
skin relationship, 
172
voice influence, 
541
 
, 
542
Yang deficiency of Stomach and Spleen, feeling of cold, 
814
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency, 
888-889
acupuncture, 
889
clinical manifestations, 
888-889
learning difficulties (children), 
804
2712
prescription, 
889
Spleen- and Heart-Qi deficiency, somnolence, 
810
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency
amenorrhoea, 
829
atrophy of legs, 
694
blood in urine, 
758
borborygmi (bowel sounds), 
743
breast distension, 
849
cold feet, 
694
convulsions in children, 
871
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
distended abdominal veins, 
743
drooping lips, 
624
dull-white nails, 
691
heavy periods, 
828
hiccup, 
719
incontinence of faeces, 
750
loss of pubic hair, 
773
 
, 
860
mid-cycle menstrual bleeding, 
830
milky nipple discharge, 
851
muscle twitching, 
714-715
night vision decreased, 
630
nighttime urination, 
758
oedema during menstruation, 
833
pale menstrual blood, 
825
pale scrotum, 
770
phlegm in throat, 
604
poor appetite, 
720
2713
premenstrual tension, 
832
protruding umbilicus, 
147
severe, sagging lower abdomen, 
745
slow fetal growth, 
842
straining in defecation, 
752
sunken fontanelles, 
871
swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
726
swollen scrotum, 
770
umbilical pain, 
739
vomiting in children, 
864
vomiting of blood, 
726
watery menstrual blood, 
826
wax production excess, 
583
white membrane on pupil in children, 
648
yawning, 
670
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Liver-Qi stagnation, premenstrual breast
distension, 
833
Spleen- and Kidney-Yang deficiency with Phlegm
breast lumps, 
851
swollen breasts, 
850
Spleen- and Kidney-Yin deficiency, tongue/palate white spots, 
872
Spleen- and Liver-Blood deficiency, 
889
Spleen- and Lung-Qi deficiency, 
889
clinical manifestations, 
889
nocturnal enuresis, 
867
prescription, 
889
Spleen- and Stomach-Qi deficiency, 
888
Spleen and Kidney deficiency with Dampness, flaking nails, 
690
Spleen-Blood deficiency, 
886
2714
Spleen channel
abdomen, 
145
eyes relationship, 
77
mouth, 
93
palpation, 
530-531
 
, 
531
blood vessel, 
530
skin, 
530-531
skin, 
174
Spleen Combined Patterns, 
888-889
Spleen- and Heart-Blood deficiency, 
888-889
Spleen- and Stomach-Qi deficiency, 
888
Spleen Damp-Heat
clinical manifestations, 
970
prescription, 
956
 
, 
970
Spleen deficiency
constitutional, Five Flaccidities, 
869
constitutional weakness, 
867
late closure of fontanelles, 
872
Spleen deficiency with accumulation disorder, hot palms and soles, 
866
Spleen deficiency with Liver-Yang rising and Phlegm, dizziness in pregnancy, 
840
Spleen deficient and Cold, 
868
Spleen deficient and Cold, crying in babies, 
868
Spleen Empty-Heat, red gums, 
620
Spleen-Heat, 
888
acupuncture, 
888
clinical manifestations, 
888
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
peeled lips, 
623
2715
prescription, 
888
red eyelids, 
637
red gums, 
620
red nose, 
590
swollen eyelids, 
638
tiredness, 
285
yellow complexion, 
576
yellow nose, 
590
Spleen not controlling Blood, 
886-887
acupuncture, 
886-887
clinical manifestations, 
886
prescription, 
887
Spleen-Qi, 
262
Spleen-Qi and Heart-Blood deficiency, ejaculation during sleep, 
767
Spleen Qi and Spleen-Blood deficiency, 
804
Spleen-Qi deficiency, 
885
abdominal distension (bloating), 
327
 
, 
741
acupuncture, 
885
bleeding between iris and pupil, 
649
bleeding from ears, 
583
bleeding from gums, 
619
bleeding on intercourse, 
860
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
boil on eyelid, 
639
breast milk, 
847
chronic
candida, 
787
sallow complexion, 
578
2716
tinea, 
787
yellow complexion, 
576
chronic with retention of Dampness, yellow nose, 
590
clinical manifestations, 
885
craving for sweets/constant picking, 
722
diarrhoea during menstruation, 
833
diarrhoea in children, 
865
diarrhoea or loose stools, 
747
difficulty in defecation, 
752
dribbling from mouth, 
612
fever after childbirth, 
846
flatulence, 
743
following food poisoning, sunken eyeball, 
643
habitual miscarriage, 
842
with Lung-Qi deficiency 
See
 
Lung- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
menstrual bleeding returning after menopause, 
830
muscle atrophy along spine, 
705
night vision decreased, 
630
nosebleed, 
594
nosebleed during menstruation, 
834
numbness of the tongue, 
614
obesity, 
319
oedema after childbirth, 
846
painful urination, 
839
pale gums, 
620
patterns, 
885-886
prescription, 
885
2717
severe, constipation and loose stools alternation, 
750
severe with internal Wind (children), bluish-greenish nails, 
692
sleepiness after eating, 
722
tiredness, 
285
trembling lips, 
623
turbid urine, 
754
urinary difficulty after childbirth, 
845
vaginal bleeding, 
838
weak voice, 
820
white membrane on pupil in children, 
648
white vaginal discharge, 
857
yellow vaginal discharge, 
857
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Blood deficiency, jaundice, 
714
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat
bad smell sensation, 
597
boil on eyelid, 
639
candida, 
787
herpes simplex, 
785
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Damp-Heat in Stomach, mouth ulcers during menstruation,
834
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness, 
885-886
acne, 
569
 
, 
784
acupuncture, 
885-886
 
, 
886
breech presentation, 
842
clinical manifestations, 
885
ear discharge, 
583
eczema, 
783
heaviness feeling in legs, 
700
2718
heaviness feeling in limbs, 
673-674
leukoplakia, 
859
prescription, 
886
sallow complexion, 
578
sleepiness after eating, 
723
stye on eyelids, 
637
tinea, 
786
ulcers on lower leg, 
701
vaginal itching, 
858
white membrane on pupil in children, 
648
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness and secondary Liver-Qi stagnation, premenstrual
tension, 
832
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Liver-Qi stagnation
goitre, 
604
yellow complexion, 
576
Spleen-Qi deficiency with Phlegm, 
886
acupuncture, 
886
clinical manifestations, 
886
dizziness during menstruation, 
835
nodules under skin, 
788
prescription, 
886
somnolence, 
810
vomiting during menstruation, 
835
wheezing, 
663
Spleen-Qi deficient and sinking
anal prolapse, 
762
diarrhoea or loose stools, 
748
drooping eyelids, 
640
2719
drooping lips, 
624
haemorrhoids, 
762
nocturnal enuresis, 
757-758
urine retention, 
839
Spleen-Qi sinking, 
886
acupuncture, 
886
clinical manifestations, 
886
leaning of head to one side, 
564
long penis in children, 
872
loose scrotum, 
769
prescription, 
886
prolapse of uterus, 
859
prolapse of vagina, 
859
sunken umbilicus, 
745
Spleen-Yang and Liver-Blood deficiency, painful periods, 
829
Spleen-Yang deficiency, 
886
acupuncture, 
886
clinical manifestations, 
886
cold hands, 
680
coldness, 
364
Kidney- and Spleen-Yang deficiency, 
910
limb oedema, 
675
oedema in pregnancy, 
838
oedema of abdomen, 
745
oedema of body, 
713
oedema of hands, 
684
oedema of the face, 
572
oedema of the feet, 
693
2720
prescription, 
886
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Dampness
scanty and difficult urination, 
755
somnolence, 
810
Spleen-Yang deficiency with Empty-Cold
pale gums, 
620
pale lips, 
621
purple lips, 
621
Spleen-Yin deficiency, 
887
acupuncture, 
887
clinical manifestations, 
887
gnawing hunger, 
722
patterns, 
887
prescription, 
887
retching, 
725
Spleen-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
loose teeth, 
616
peeled lips, 
623
swollen eyelids, 
638
sprain, back, lower backache, 
703
sputum
chest pain, 
324
diagnosis by smell, 
550
observation, 
163-164
 
, 
164
ST-9 Renying, 
529
 
, 
530
ST-25 Tianshu, 
521
ST-40 Fenglong, 
664
ST-42 Chongyang, Stomach channel, 
529
 
, 
530
 
, 
530
2721
Stagnant Cold in Uterus, 
1002-1003
Stagnant Heat in Directing and Penetrating Vessels, 
1001
Stagnant Liver-Qi 
See
 
Liver-Qi stagnation
Stagnant Liver-Qi invading Stomach, morning sickness, 
837
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned Heat, 
891-892
acupuncture, 
892
bloody nipple discharge, 
852
chronic fever, 
375
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
891-892
prescription, 
892
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Fire
breast lumps, 
851
cracked nipples, 
852
Stagnant Liver-Qi turned into Heat
breasts, redness and swelling, 
850
fever in cancer, 
816
Stagnant Liver-Qi turning into Heat with Blood Stasis, breasts, redness and swelling,
850
Stagnant pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
stagnation, depression, 
381-382
stagnation of Qi 
See
 
Qi stagnation
staring, fixed eyes, 
83
 
, 
123
 
, 
650
steaming breast, fever after childbirth, 
847
sternum, protruding, 
144
 
, 
144
 
, 
669
Stomach
abdominal reflection of state, 
146
Body Fluid deficiency, 
935
channels, 
994
Cold invading, 
916
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
2722
Dampness, 
977
Dampness in Stomach, 
1019
epigastrium relationship, 
515
food retention, 
916
invasion of Cold, vomiting in children, 
864
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
pattern identification, 
913-916
Phlegm-Fluids, 
937
Postnatal Qi, 
261
pulse influence, 
452
Rebellious Liver-Qi invading the Stomach, 
897
right middle pulse position, 
504
 
, 
504-505
 
, 
505
skin relationship, 
172
Toxic Heat in 
See
 
Toxic Heat
Yang deficiency of Stomach and Spleen, feeling of cold, 
814
Stomach- and Heart-Fire, grinding teeth, 
616
Stomach- and Intestines-Yin deficiency, constipation, 
749
Stomach- and Intestines-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, blood and mucus in stools,
750
Stomach- and Liver-Fire, vomiting, 
724
Stomach- and Spleen-Heat, sweet taste, 
727
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency
abdominal masses, 
744
atrophy of legs, 
694
atrophy of muscles in dorsum of hands, 
686
atrophy of thenar eminence, 
685
belching, 
717
blood in stools, 
751
cataract, 
651
2723
chronic, yellow palate, 
625
dizziness, 
560
dribbling of urine, 
756
drooping head, 
563
dry and brittle hair, 
566
epigastric pain, 
737
flapping eyelids, 
639
headache, 
291
leg weakness, 
699
limb atrophy, 
674
limb flaccidity, 
675
limb paralysis, 
676-677
loss of taste, 
728
open eyes, 
650
pale palate, 
624
paralysis, 
710
paralysis of legs, 
695
poor appetite, 
720
severe, withered and thickened nails, 
690
sweating of hands and feet, 
778-779
thin pointed fingers, 
687
tooth cavities, 
616
toothache, 
615
urination difficult, 
756
urticaria, 
784
vomiting during menstruation, 
835
weak knees, 
699
2724
weight loss, 
319
 
, 
714
Yin Fire with, mouth ulcers, 
610
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency and sinking, drooping eyelids, 
640
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Cold in Stomach, loss of taste, 
728
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Dampness, heaviness feeling in limbs, 
674
Stomach- and Spleen-Qi deficiency with Heart-Heat, abdominal pain (area below
xyphoid process), 
736
Stomach- and Spleen-Yang deficiency
absence of thirst, 
733
convulsions in children, 
871
with Empty-Cold, pale nose, 
589
feeling of cold in abdomen, 
742
pale palate, 
624
Stomach- and Spleen-Yin deficiency
dry and cracked lips, 
622
sweating of hands and feet, 
779
Stomach and Intestines deficient and cold, diarrhoea with vomiting, 
748
Stomach and Pericardium Fire, depression and manic behaviour, 
799
Stomach and Spleen deficiency
congenital, arched legs, 
696
lordosis, 
707
Stomach and Spleen deficient and cold
abdominal fullness, 
741
borborygmi (bowel sounds), 
743
increased salivation, 
733
poor appetite, 
720
yellow fluid between iris and pupil, 
648-649
Stomach and Spleen Fluids injured, paralysis, 
711
Stomach-Blood stasis, 
915
 
, 
931
Stomach channel
2725
abdomen, 
145
area under xyphoid process, 
513
breasts, 
121
 
, 
121
 
, 
122
Damp-Heat in 
See
 
Damp-Heat
eyes relationship, 
77
 
, 
77
heart, 
127-128
mouth, 
93
 
, 
94
neck and throat, 
109
 
, 
109
palpation, 
529-530
 
, 
530
blood vessel, 
529
skin, 
529-530
teeth and gums, 
99
Stomach-Cold
green eyelids, 
638
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
Stomach cracks, tongue diagnosis, 
229
 
, 
229
 
, 
330
 
, 
plate 25.5
Stomach Damp-Heat, 
916
acupuncture, 
916
 
, 
956
clinical manifestations, 
916
 
, 
956
prescription, 
916
 
, 
956
Stomach deficient and cold
belching, 
718
venules on the thenar eminence, 
685
vomiting, 
724
Stomach deficient and Cold (Stomach-Yang deficiency), 
913-914
acupuncture, 
913-914
clinical manifestations, 
913-914
prescription, 
914
2726
Stomach-Yang and Stomach-Yin deficiency, 
914
Stomach Empty-Heat, yellow complexion, 
576
Stomach-Fire, 
915
acupuncture, 
915
bleeding gums, 
619
clinical manifestations, 
915
epigastric pain, 
737
excessive hunger, 
720
gums oozing pus, 
620
mouth ulcers during menstruation, 
834
nosebleed, 
594
nosebleed during menstruation, 
834
numbness of face, 
572
painful tongue, 
614
prescription, 
915
receding gums, 
619
toothache, 
307
 
, 
615
trembling lips, 
623
vomiting of blood, 
725
warts on ear, 
585
 
See also
 
Stomach Phlegm-Fire
Stomach-Heat, 
915
abdominal pain (area below xyphoid process), 
736
acupuncture, 
915
 
, 
955
belching, 
717
body aches, 
710
burning sensations in soles of feet, 
701
clinical manifestations, 
915
 
, 
955
cold sores, 
610
2727
cracked mouth corners, 
611
disturbed sleep, 
868
drooping eyelids, 
640
dry and white teeth, 
617
dry nostrils, 
593
epigastric pain, 
737
excessive hunger, 
720
foul breath, 
729
gnawing hunger, 
721
headache, 
561
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hiccup, 
719
hot hands, 
680
hot hands and feet, 
673
inflamed gums, 
618
irritability, 
801
itching around mouth, 
611
loose teeth, 
616
morning sickness, 
837
mouth ulcers, 
609
nausea, 
723
pain in soles of feet, 
698
papules on nose, 
598-599
plaque, 
617
prescription, 
915
 
, 
955
red eyelids, 
637
red gums, 
620
2728
redness of pharynx, 
602
retching, 
725
sleep talking, 
810
sour taste, 
728
thirst, 
731
trembling mouth, 
612
urticaria, 
785
vomiting, 
724
weight loss, 
714
yellow complexion, 
576
 
See also
 
Heat
Stomach Phlegm-Fire, 
915
acupuncture, 
915
clinical manifestations, 
915
prescription, 
915
Stomach-Qi, 
262
pulse
interpretation, 
454
normal attribute, 
451-452
tongue coating, 
207
 
, 
221
 
, 
222
 
, 
228
Stomach-Qi deficiency, 
913
acupuncture, 
913
breast milk, 
847
clinical manifestations, 
837
 
, 
913
hiccup, 
719
limb weakness, 
674
nausea, 
723
pain in soles of feet, 
698
prescription, 
913
2729
small breasts, 
852
vomiting, 
724
in children, 
864
Stomach-Qi deficiency with Dampness, pain in soles of feet, 
698
Stomach-Qi rebelling upwards, 
916
Stomach-Qi stagnation, 
914-915
abdominal pain (area below xyphoid process), 
736
acupuncture, 
914
clinical manifestations, 
914
prescription, 
914-915
Stomach strong - Spleen weak, hunger with no desire to eat, 
721
Stomach-Yang and Stomach-Yin deficiency, 
914
prescription, 
914
Stomach-Yang deficiency, 
913-914
acupuncture, 
913-914
clinical manifestations, 
913-914
pain in hands, 
682-683
prescription, 
914
Stomach-Yang and Stomach-Yin deficiency, 
914
Stomach-Yin deficiency, 
914
acupuncture, 
914
belching, 
718
clinical manifestations, 
914
cracked mouth corners, 
611
dry throat, 
605
epigastric pain, 
737
hiccup, 
719
morning sickness, 
837
nausea, 
723
2730
patterns, 
914
poor appetite, 
720
prescription, 
914
restless legs, 
700
scarring after corneal opacity, 
647
swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
726
thirst, 
732
vomiting, 
724
vomiting in children, 
864
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Blood dryness, regurgitation of food, 
719
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Cold, morning sickness, 
837
Stomach-Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat, 
914
acupuncture, 
914
bleeding gums, 
619
clinical manifestations, 
914
cold sores, 
610-611
cracked mouth corners, 
611
dry nostrils, 
594
excessive hunger, 
720
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
hot hands, 
680-681
hot hands and feet, 
673
inflamed gums, 
618
painful tongue, 
614
prescription, 
914
red gums, 
620
thirst, 
732
toothache, 
615
2731
vomiting of blood, 
725
stools
blood and mucus in, 
750-751
blood in, 
751
colour, 
164-165
 
, 
165
 
, 
272-273
consistency, 
165
 
, 
165
 
, 
271
defecation of 
See
 
defecation
foul smelling, 
271
 
, 
273
 
, 
550
frequency, 
270-271
incontinence, 
750
interrogation, 
261-267
loose, 
747-748
constipation alternation, 
749-750
mucus in, 
271
 
, 
751
normal, 
164
 
, 
272
observation, 
164-165
odour, 
273
shape, 
165
 
, 
165
 
, 
272
 
, 
272
smell diagnosis, 
550-551
 
See also
 
constipation;
 
diarrhoea
strabismus, 
83
 
, 
83
symptoms/signs, 
628-629
streaming eyes, 
84
 
, 
84
 
, 
360
 
, 
360
 
, 
633-634
stress, case histories, 
1020
 
, 
1022
stroke, hemiplegia, 
155
stroking, palpation technique, 
509
 
, 
510
stuffiness, abdominal pain, 
327
 
, 
736
stuffiness feeling under Heart, 
666
stuttering, 
543
 
, 
822
Su He Xiang Wan
 
, 
1042-1043
2732
Su Zi Jiang Qi Tang
 
, 
1043
sublingual veins, 
213-214
 
, 
1057
 
, 
plate 24.10
suffocation, feeling of, pregnancy, 
841
Summer-Heat, 
370
acupuncture, 
954
carbuncles on upper back, 
788
clinical manifestations, 
815
 
, 
948
 
, 
954
with Dampness, 
950
pathogenic factors, 
948
 
, 
948
prescription, 
954
tidal fever, 
816
Summer-Heat invasion
diarrhoea with vomiting, 
748
spontaneous sweating, 
776
Summer-Heat with Toxic Heat, boil on head, 
788
Sun
 
, 
526
sunken eyeball, 
82-83
 
, 
643
sunken fontanelles, 
871
Suo Gong Zhu Yu Tang
 
, 
1043
Suo Quan Wan
 
, 
1043
Superficial Connecting channels, 
526
 
See also
 
Connecting channels
swallowing difficulty (diaphragm choking), 
726
sweat/sweating, 
351-354
absence of, 
353-354
 
, 
780
after childbirth, 
846
body area, 
353
chest, 
778
classification, 
353
clinical significance, 
352
from collapse, 
776-777
2733
daytime, 
351
 
, 
351
 
, 
353
exterior patterns, 
352
hands and feet, 
778-779
head, 
778
interior patterns, 
352
 
, 
352
localized, 
777-779
nighttime, 
351-352
 
, 
352
 
, 
776
observation, 
164
 
, 
164
pathology, 
352-353
shivering, 
353
smell diagnosis, 
550
spontaneous, 
775-776
symptoms and signs, 
775-789
unilateral, 
777-778
yellow, 
777
sweet craving, 
722
sweet taste, 
727
swimming shrimp pulse, 
507
symptoms and signs, 
601-608
Chinese terms, 
1061-1063
gynaecological problems, 
823-860
breast signs, 
849-853
childbirth, 
843-848
menstrual bleeding, 
825-826
menstrual cycle, 
827-830
menstruation, problem symptoms, 
831-835
miscellaneous, 
855-860
pregnancy, 
837-842
 
see also individual entries
2734
parts of the body, 
557-822
abdomen, 
735-745
anus, 
761-763
arms, 
679-692
chest, 
659-670
cold feeling, shivering, 
813-814
defecation, 
747-752
digestive system and taste, 
717-729
ears, 
581-588
emotions, 
791-795
eyes, 
627-652
face colour (complexion), 
575-580
fever, 
814-817
gynaecological, 
823-860
head and face, 
559-574
heat feeling, 
817-818
legs, 
693-701
limbs, 
671-678
lips, 
621-624
lower back, 
703-715
mental difficulties, 
803-805
mental-emotional symptoms, 
797-802
mouth, tongue, teeth, gums and lips, 
609-624
nails, 
688-692
neck and shoulders, 
653-656
nose, 
589-600
palate and philtrum, 
624-626
2735
sexual and genital symptoms in men, 
765-774
skin, 
781-789
sleeping problems, 
807-811
sweating, 
775-789
thirst and drink, 
731-733
throat, 
601-608
voice, 
819-821
 
see also individual entries
timescales, 
241
2736
T
tachycardia, pulse indication, 
459
Tao He Cheng Qi Tang
 
, 
1043
Tao Hong Si Wu Tang
 
, 
1043
taste
bitter, 
726-727
classification, 
265
food and, 
261-267
interrogation, 
261-267
loss of, 
728
salty, 
727
sour, 
727-728
sticky/metallic, 
728
sweet, 
727
TB-22 Heliao, 
535
 
, 
535-536
techniques, 
509-510
teeth, 
99-100
 
, 
306-308
abnormal colour, 
100
 
, 
100
bad, 
100
channels influencing, 
99
 
, 
99
dry and dull, 
100
 
, 
617
dry and white, 
100
 
, 
617
grey, 
100
 
, 
618
grinding, 
616-617
loose, 
100
 
, 
616-617
observation, 
99-100
plaque, 
100
 
, 
617
symptoms and signs, 
99
 
, 
615-618
2737
teethmarks, 
plate 25.8
tooth cavities, 
99
 
, 
616
toothache, 
615
upper moist and lower dry, 
100
 
, 
618
yellow and dry, 
100
 
, 
618
 
See also
 
gums
temperature
pain, 
258
 
See also
 
Cold;
 
Heat
temples palpation, babies, 
518-519
 
, 
519
 
See also
 
fontanelles
Terminal-Yin channels, headache, 
562
Terminal-Yin stage
acupuncture, 
968
clinical manifestations, 
968
prescription, 
968
testicles, swelling and pain in, 
773
thenar eminence, 
1056
thighs
pain in, 
344
 
, 
696-697
 
See also
 
limbs
thirst
absence of, 
279
 
, 
733
case histories, diabetes mellitus, 
278-279
dry mouth, 
279
 
, 
732-733
hot/cold drink preference, 
279
interrogation, 
277-279
symptoms and signs, 
731-733
 
See also
 
drinks/drinking
thorax 
See
 
chest
Three Burners (Triple Burner)
blood strength indication in, 
454
channels, 
995-996
ears relationship, 
105
 
, 
106
2738
Lower Burner, 
970-971
Middle Burner, 
970
neck, 
109
 
, 
109
palpation (channel), 
535
 
, 
535-536
blood vessel, 
535
skin, 
535
pattern identification, 
939-940
 
, 
969-971
pulse qualities classification, 
499
Qi strength
reflection, 
444-445
three levels, 
455
 
, 
455
 
, 
456
relationship to
Four Levels, 
941
 
, 
962
 
, 
963-964
Six Stages, 
962
 
, 
962
 
, 
963-964
skin, 
172
 
, 
172-173
 
, 
173
Upper Burner, 
969-970
 
see also individual elements
throat
carotid artery pulsation, 
110
 
, 
655
channels influencing, 
109
 
, 
109-110
 
, 
110
 
, 
312
children, 
193
 
, 
193
dry, 
313
 
, 
313
 
, 
605-606
feeling of obstruction, 
314
 
, 
314
foul breath, 
111
goitre, 
110
 
, 
110
 
, 
604
hoarse voice, 
313-314
 
, 
314
interrogation, 
311-316
itching, 
313
 
, 
605
2739
observation, 
109-114
obstruction feeling, 
607
Phlegm, 
603-604
 
See also
 
neck;
 
pharynx;
 
tonsils
thrush 
See
 
candida
thumbs, 
140
 
, 
140
Thunder Rampart, 
79
Tian Di Jian
 
, 
1043
Tian Gui
 
(sperm/menstrual blood), 
430
Tian Ma Gou Teng Yin
 
, 
1043
Tian Tai Wu Yao San
 
, 
1043
Tian Wang Bu Xin Dan
 
, 
1044
Tiao Wei Cheng Qi Tang
 
, 
1044
Tiao Zheng San
 
, 
1044
tics, facial, 
61
 
, 
572-573
tidal fever, 
816
Tight pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
timidity, severe, 
795
tinea (ringworm)
hands, 
130
 
, 
684
pathology and diagnosis
Chinese, 
187
 
, 
187
Western, 
186
 
, 
187
symptoms and signs, 
786-787
tinea capitis, 
plate 21.43
tinea corporis (ringworm), 
plate 21.40,
 
, 
plate 21.41
tinea cruris, 
plate 21.45
tinea manuum, 
plate 21.42
tinea pedis, 
plate 21.44
tingling 
See
 
numbness/tingling
tinnitus, 
355
 
, 
357
 
, 
581-582
2740
case history, 
356
headache, 
288
 
See also
 
deafness
tiredness, 
281-286
acute onset, 
1023
case histories, 
282-286
 
, 
1022
 
, 
1023
depression, 
381
patterns causing, 
282-286
 
See also
 
exhaustion 
(Xu Lao)
toe(s)
ulcers, 
701
 
See also
 
feet
tolerance 
See
 
drug tolerance;
 
pain tolerance
Tong You Tang
 
, 
1044
tongue, 
309
appearance comparison
Four Levels, 
958
residual pathogenic factors, 
976
breast areas, 
123
clinical significance, 
206-207
colour
external factors affecting, 
204
 
, 
204
purple (sides), 
205
 
, 
206
 
, 
206
 
See also
 
tongue-body colour
Heart cracks, 
36
 
, 
37
 
, 
217
 
, 
217-218
internal/external Wind, 
231
itching, 
309
 
, 
613
numbness, 
309
 
, 
614
pain in, 
309
 
, 
613-614
Qi/blood stagnation, 
231
Qi deficiency, 
227
spirit and emotions, 
36
 
, 
37
2741
Stomach cracks, 
229
 
, 
229
sublingual veins, 
213-214
 
, 
1057
 
, 
plate 24.10
symptoms and signs, 
613-615
teethmarks, 
plate 25.8
ulcers, 
614-615
white spots, 
872
tongue-body colour, 
206
 
, 
209-214
bluish-purple, 
plate 24.7
external factors affecting, 
204
 
, 
204
pale, 
210
 
, 
plate 24.1
purple, 
212-213
 
, 
213,
 
, 
plate 24.8,
 
, 
plate 24.9
red, 
210
 
, 
210
 
, 
211,
 
, 
plate 24.2
with slow pulse, 
463
red points, 
211-212
 
, 
212,
 
, 
plate 24.5
red tips, 
plate 24.3
reddish-purple, 
plate 24.6
tongue-body shape, 
206
 
, 
215-220
cracked, 
217
 
, 
217-218
 
, 
218
 
, 
463
 
, 
plate 25.4
deviated, 
218
 
, 
218
 
, 
231
flaccid, 
217
long/short, 
217
moving, 
218
quivering, 
219
stiff, 
216
 
, 
plate 25.3
swollen/partially swollen, 
216
 
, 
216,
 
, 
plate 25.1,
 
, 
plate 25.2,
 
, 
plate
27.1
thin, 
215-216
toothmarked, 
219
 
, 
219
2742
tongue coating, 
206-207
 
, 
221-225
 
, 
plate 26.2
appearance, 
958
clinical significance, 
221-222
distribution, 
223
 
, 
223
epigastrium, 
330
external diseases, 
224-225
formation, 
207
moisture, 
223
mouldy, 
224
physiology, 
221
presence/absence, 
222
slippery, 
224
sticky, 
123
 
, 
224
 
, 
plate 26.3
texture, 
224
thickness, 
223
with/without root, 
222-223
 
, 
223,
 
, 
plate 26.1
yellow, 
111
tongue diagnosis, 
201-232
 
, 
230
 
, 
237
case histories, 
1015
 
, 
1016
 
, 
1022
examination conditions, 
203-204
historical aspects, 
1058-1059
integration with interrogation, 
243-248
lighting, 
203
observation techniques, 
203-204
pulse diagnosis integration, 
463-464
tongue areas, 
204
 
, 
204-206
 
, 
205
 
, 
206
tongue images/patterns, 
227-231
Blood-deficiency, 
228
2743
Qi deficiency, 
227
Yang deficiency, 
227-228
Yin deficiency, 
228-230
 
, 
229
tongue spirit, 
207
 
, 
209
tonsillitis, 
314-315
acute, 
314
case history, 
315
 
, 
315
chronic, 
314-315
tonsils, 
314-315
 
, 
979
abnormal colour, 
111-112
exudate, 
112
greyish, 
112
red and swollen, 
111-112
signs, 
112
swollen, 
111
 
, 
603
 
See also
 
throat
tooth 
See
 
teeth
toothache, 
306-307
 
, 
307
 
, 
615
touching, palpation technique, 
509
 
, 
510
Toxic 
See
 
Toxic Heat
Toxic Heat
anal ulcers, 
763
Blood level (Four Levels)
contracted pupils, 
650
swollen nose, 
596
bloody nipple discharge, 
851
breast lumps, 
851
breast pain, 
850
breasts, redness and swelling, 
850
buttock ulcers, 
706-707
2744
cancer, 
462
 
, 
463
channels of face
deviation of the mouth, 
613
eye and mouth deviation, 
573
Chickenpox, 
870
concha swelling and redness, 
587
corneal opacity, 
647
crying out, 
822
dandruff, 
567
epidemic on Exterior, white purulent spots in throat, 
606
epidemic on Interior, white purulent spots in throat, 
606
external
buttock ulcers, 
707
red, itching and swollen fingers, 
785
toe ulcers, 
701
face, redness and swelling of face, 
573-574
fever in cancer, 
816
five-colour vaginal discharge, 
858
head
boils on scalp, 
568
head swelling, 
564
Heart invasion, heartbeat displaced downwards, 
667
herpes zoster, 
786
Intestines
blood and mucus in stools, 
750
blood in stools, 
751
invasion
2745
herpes simplex, 
786
redness and swelling of face, 
573
with Wind-Heat 
See
 
Wind-Heat
itching, 
713
Liver
nails falling off, 
689
ulcers on nose, 
598
Liver and Gall-Bladder, ear discharge, 
583
Lower Burner, blood in sperm, 
768
Lungs
dry nostrils, 
594
itching nose, 
593
swollen nose, 
596
Lungs and Stomach, runny nose, 
592-593
measles, eye discharge, 
634
mouth ulcers, 
610
Nutritive-Qi level, swollen nose, 
596
protruding eyeball, 
643
raised fontanelles, 
871-872
rash in axillae, 
785
redness, erosion and swelling of pharynx, 
602
rosacea, 
785
skin
acne, 
569
 
, 
783-784
tinea (ringworm) of hands, 
684
urticaria, 
784
Stomach
2746
boil on eyelid, 
639
ulcers below zygomatic arch, 
574
Stomach and Intestines, swollen tonsils, 
603
Stomach and Spleen, swollen lips, 
623
strabismus, 
629
throat at Qi level, swollen tonsils, 
603
tinea, 
786
toe ulcers, 
701
ulcers on penis, 
773
Wind-Heat invasion with 
See
 
Wind-Heat,
 
invasion with Toxic Heat
yellow sclera, 
635
toxic heat, tonsils, 
979
Toxic Heat at Qi level, 
870
Toxic Heat in Interior, erysipelas, 
870
Toxic Heat in Liver channel
red scrotum, 
770
redness and swelling of glans penis, 
772
swollen and oozing scrotum, 
770
vulval swelling, 
858-859
Toxic Heat in Lower Burner, swelling and pain in testicles, 
773
Toxic Heat in Stomach, red, itching and swollen fingers, 
785
Toxic Heat in Stomach and Lungs
carbuncles on upper back, 
788
neck ulcers, 
789
Toxic Heat in tonsils, 
979
Toxic Heat in Uterus, menstrual bleeding returning after menopause, 
830
Toxic Heat on Exterior, erysipelas, 
870
Toxic Heat with Blood stasis
acne, 
784
2747
breasts, peau d’orange, 
852
inverted nipples, 
852
swollen neck glands, 
655
Toxic Heat with Empty-Heat in Stomach, carbuncles on neck, 
788
Toxic Heat with Liver-Fire and Damp-Heat, vulvar sores, 
858
Toxic Heat with stagnation of Qi and stasis of Blood, 
584
toxins, external, convulsions/fever after childbirth, 
846
 
, 
848
trachoma, 
645-646
tranquillizers, effect on pulse, 
507
trauma, 
428-429
climate, 
416
coccyx pain, 
705
miscarriage, 
841
vaginal bleeding, 
838
tremor
arms, 
341
feet, 
64-65
hands, 
64
 
, 
130
 
, 
130
 
, 
156
 
, 
684
head, 
59
 
, 
70
 
, 
564
legs, 
700
limbs, 
62-63
 
, 
156
 
, 
156
 
, 
340-341
 
, 
678
tricyclic antidepressants, effect on pulse, 
507
trigeminal neuralgia, 
303
Triple Burner 
See
 
Three Burners (Triple Burner);
 
individual elements
true Cold–false Heat, 
988
 
, 
988
true Heat–false Cold, 
814
 
, 
988
 
, 
989
 
, 
1022
Tu Si Zi Wan
 
, 
1044
tuberculosis (TB)
health line, 
134
 
, 
134
spoon-shaped fingers, 
131
 
, 
131
2748
tumours, abdominal cavity, 
128
 
See also
 
cancer
Turbid Dampness surrounding Heart, 
883
acupuncture, 
883
clinical manifestations, 
883
prescription, 
883
Turbid Phlegm
head
blurred vision and floaters, 
628
headache, 
561
visual acuity decreased, 
630
lungs, purple lips, 
622
throat, white purulent spots, 
606
Turbid Phlegm in Heart, 
803
Turbid Yin not descending, clinical manifestations, 
932
Twelve Channels
bladder, 
995
gall-bladder, 
996
heart, 
994
kidneys, 
995
large intestine, 
993-994
liver, 
996
lungs, 
993
pattern identification, 
993-996
pericardium, 
995
small intestine, 
994-995
spleen, 
994
stomach, 
994
Triple Burner, 
995-996
2749
U
ulcerative colitis
case history, 
272
hands lines, 
133
ulcers
anal, 
763
buttocks, 
706-707
face (below zygomatic arch), 
71
 
, 
574
foot, 
plate 21.8,
 
, 
plate 21.9
head, 
70
 
, 
564-565
lower leg, 
701
mouth, 
97
 
, 
97
 
, 
308
 
, 
308-309
 
, 
609-610
 
, 
834
neck, 
789
nose, 
90
 
, 
598
pathology and diagnosis, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
180
penis, 
150
 
, 
772-773
pharynx, 
111
scalp, 
70
 
, 
568-569
skin, 
180-181
 
, 
181
toes, 
701
tongue, 
614-615
umbilicus
pain, 
332
 
, 
738-739
pulsation feeling under, 
742
pulse, 
515
 
, 
515
regions, 
515
 
, 
515
signs, 
147
2750
protruding, 
147
 
, 
745
sunken, 
147
 
, 
745
untying rope pulse, 
507
Upper Burner
pattern identification, 
969-970
pulse diagnosis
Inch section, 
437
 
, 
438
position assignment, 
443
state of, 
434
 
, 
435
 
See also
 
Three Burners (Triple Burner)
upper respiratory infections, children, 
112
Upright Qi, deficiency, 
462
upturned knife pulse, 
507
urinary infections, hand lines, 
135
urination (micturition)
difficulty with, 
275
 
, 
755-756
 
, 
845
frequent, 
756
nighttime, 
758
nocturnal enuresis, 
274
 
, 
275
 
, 
757-758
 
, 
867
painful, 
275
 
, 
754-755
problems in children, 
867
problems in pregnancy, 
839
urine, 
274-275
blood in, 
758
 
, 
839
cloudiness, 
275
colour, 
165
 
, 
165
 
, 
274
dark, 
753-754
dribbling, 
756-757
frequency, 
274
incontinence, 
275
 
, 
757
2751
interrogation, 
261-267
observation, 
165
 
, 
166
odour, 
275
pale and abundant, 
754
quantity, 
275
smell diagnosis, 
550-551
sperm in, 
759
turbid, 
754
urine retention, 
274
 
, 
275
 
, 
839
in infants, 
867
urticaria, 
plate 21.32
chronic, 
plate 21.33
dermographism, 
181
 
, 
plate 21.10
pathology and diagnosis, Western 
vs
 
Chinese, 
185
 
, 
185
symptoms and signs, 
784-785
wheals, 
185
 
See also
 
itching
Uterus
Dampness and Phlegm, 
1002
invasion of external Dampness, 
950
prolapse, 
859
stagnant cold, 
1002
Uterus-Blood stasis, 
931
Uterus deficient and cold, 
1002
2752
V
vagina
leukoplakia, 
859
prolapse, 
151
 
, 
859
vaginal bleeding
after childbirth, 
845
on intercourse, 
859-860
in pregnancy, 
838
trauma, 
838
 
See also
 
menstrual bleeding
vaginal discharge, 
409
 
, 
409
 
, 
857-858
case history, 
396
five-colour, 
857-858
observation, 
166-167
 
, 
167
colour, 
166
 
, 
167
 
, 
857
consistency, 
166
 
, 
167
lochia 
See
 
lochia
red-white, 
857
smell, 
551
white, 
857
yellow, 
857
 
See also
 
lochia
vaginal itching, 
858
vaginal prolapse, 
151
 
, 
859
veins
eyes, 
plate 12.1
inner leg, plucking of, 
1056-1057
veins (children), 
194-195
colour, 
195
 
, 
195
differentiation criteria, 
194
 
, 
194
2753
length and thickness, 
195
 
, 
195
movement, 
195
 
, 
195
visibility, 
195
vertigo, benign positional
case histories, 
247-248
 
, 
295-296
 
See also
 
dizziness
vesicles, 
174
 
, 
178
 
, 
178,
 
, 
plate 21.5
vs
 
macules/papules, 
958
vision disorders, 
628-631
blurred, 
360
 
, 
360
with floaters, 
628
decreased night vision, 
630
decreased visual acuity, 
630
hyperopia, 
629-630
myopia, 
629
strabismus, 
83
 
, 
83
 
, 
628-629
sudden blindness, 
630-631
 
See also
 
eye(s)
visual hallucinations, 
76
vital substances, Chinese terms, 
1063-1064
voice, 
541-544
baby’s cry, 
544
crying out, 
543
 
, 
822
Five-Elements, 
542
groaning, 
542
 
, 
543
 
, 
822
hoarseness, 
313-314
 
, 
314
 
, 
543
 
, 
606
 
, 
820
internal organs influencing, 
541
 
, 
542
laughing, 
542
loss of, 
606
in pregnancy, 
840-841
2754
loud, 
819
mind and spirit, reflection of state, 
542
muffled, 
820
nasal, 
543
 
, 
820-821
normal, 
542
pitch, 
542
shouting, 
542
singing, 
542
snoring, 
543
 
, 
821
strength and quality, 
542
 
, 
543-544
 
, 
544
symptoms and signs, 
819-821
weak, 
820
weeping, 
542
 
See also
 
hearing (listening), diagnosis by;
speech/talking
vomiting
blood, 
725-726
in children, 
864-865
diagnosis by sound, 
547
 
, 
547
diarrhoea with, 
748
menstrual symptoms, 
835
patterns, 
266
symptoms and signs, 
724-725
 
See also
 
nausea
vulva
leukoplakia, 
151
 
, 
859
sores, 
151
 
, 
858
swelling, 
151
 
, 
858-859
2755
W
Walking Crow Teeth Nutritional Impairment Pattern, 
619
walking difficulties, 
338
 
, 
338
warfarin, effect on pulse, 
508
warts, 
189
 
, 
plate 21.51,
 
, 
plate 21.52
ears, 
107
 
, 
585
genital, 
plate 21.53
genitalia, 
189
infection route, 
189
pathology and diagnosis, 
189
 
, 
189
presentation, 
189
symptoms and signs, 
787
Water
accumulation of, 
179
 
, 
966
 
See also
 
oedema
Earth overacting on Water, 
1008
Fire insulting Water, 
1009
invasion of Lungs by Wind-Water, 
901-902
Metal not generating Water, 
1008
Water insulting Earth, 
1009
Water not generating Wood, 
1008
Water overacting on Fire, 
1008
Water Overflowing, swollen eyelids, 
638
Water Overflowing to Heart, 
883
Water Pox, 
180
Water Rampart, 
79
water retention, premenstrual symptoms, 
405
 
See also
 
oedema
Water type
body odour, 
549
 
, 
550
body shape, 
19-20
 
, 
20,
 
, 
plate 1.7
2756
faces, 
plate 1.6
voice, 
542
 
, 
542
weak breathing 
(Qi Shao)
 
, 
545
 
, 
661
Weak-Heart constitution
disease heredity, 
419
emotional problems, 
417
Weak-Kidney constitution, disease heredity, 
420
weak knees, 
344
Weak-Liver constitution, disease heredity, 
419-420
Weak-Lung constitution, disease heredity, 
419
Weak pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Weak-Spleen constitution, disease heredity, 
419
weakness, constitutional, 
866-867
constipation in children, 
867
heart deficiency, 
866
hereditary weak constitution and diet, 
416
weakness of limbs, 
338
 
, 
338
Wei Ling San
 
, 
1044
Wei Ling Tang
 
, 
1044
Wei
 
syndrome, 
61
weight change, 
713-714
 
See also
 
obesity
weight loss, 
319
 
, 
714
Wen
 
, 
539
Wen Dan Tang
 
, 
1044-1045
Wen Pi Tang
 
, 
1045
Wen Yang Bu Gan Jian
 
, 
1045
wheals, 
177
 
, 
plate 21.3
wheezing 
(Xiao)
 
, 
545
in children, 
413
 
, 
865
symptoms and signs, 
662-663
white purulent spots in, 
606-607
2757
whooping cough, 
545
Wind
Attack of, 
945
 
, 
945
acupuncture, 
965
clinical manifestations, 
965
prescription, 
965
aversion to, 
362-363
Blood stagnation generated, 
644
body aches, 
709
in channels, hemiplegia, 
711
climate, 
428
clinical manifestations, 
944
 
, 
944
coarse and thick nails, 
688
convulsions, 
155
dizziness, 
295
Empty
tremor of the head, 
564
tremor/spasticity of limbs, 
678
Empty-Wind agitating in the Interior, 
957
exterior, 
362
 
, 
944
 
, 
944-945
Wind-Cold, 
944-945
external invasion
dribbling from mouth, 
612
grinding teeth, 
617
numbness/tingling of hands, 
683
tongue, 
231
toothache, 
615
2758
Heat generated
eyeballs turning up, 
644
tremor of hands, 
684
tremor/spasticity of limbs, 
678
Heat victorious stirring Wind, 
957
interior, 
945-946
 
See also
 
Extreme Heat generating Wind;
 
Liver-
Blood deficiency;
 
Liver-Yang rising generating Wind
internal
bluish-greenish helix in children, 
585
contraction of limbs, 
677
eyeball turning up, 
644
generation, 
155
head tilted backwards, 
565
numbness/tingling, 
712
with Qi deficiency, 
648
quivering eyeball, 
644
tongue, 
231
internal Empty, grinding teeth, 
617
invasion of Lungs by, 
901-902
invasion of Lungs by Wind-Cold, 
901
invasion of Lungs by Wind-Dryness, 
901
invasion of Lungs by Wind-Water, 
901-902
in joints
joint pain, 
710
limb rigidity, 
676
Liver-Blood deficiency giving rise to Wind, 
894-895
Liver-Fire generating Wind, 
894
2759
Liver-Heat stirs Wind, 
970
Liver-Wind 
See
 
Liver-Wind
pain in hands, 
682
pain in limbs, 
672
pathogenic factors, 
943-946
in skin
dry skin, 
782
itching, 
713
Wind-Cold invasion (Wind prevalent), 
965
Wind and Heat in skin, psoriasis, 
783
Wind and Phlegm in channels
limb paralysis, 
677
paralysis of legs, 
695
Wind-Cold, 
369
 
, 
369-370
 
, 
944-945
 
, 
945
Wind-Cold in channels, facial pain, 
571
Wind-Cold in skin, urticaria, 
784
Wind-Cold invasion, 
965
cough in children, 
865
facial pain, 
302
 
, 
303
fever after childbirth, 
846
Wind-Dampness, clinical manifestations, 
945
Wind-Dampness in Girdle Vessel, unilateral sweating, 
778
Wind-Dampness invasion
head, feeling of heaviness, 
297
headache, 
291
 
, 
562
nasal voice, 
820
yellow complexion, 
577
Wind-Dampness on Exterior, spontaneous sweating, 
776
Wind-Dampness retention, channels of back
2760
lordosis, 
707
scoliosis, 
707
Wind-Dryness
acute cough, 
659
dry nostrils, 
594
dry throat, 
606
Wind-Dryness invading the Lungs, dry skin, 
782
Wind Gate, 
194
 
, 
194
Wind-Heat, 
369
 
, 
369-370
acupuncture, 
954
clinical manifestations, 
369
 
, 
954
 
, 
959
Dry-Heat, 
370
external invasion
fever in children, 
863-864
tinea (ringworm) of hands, 
684
headache, 
291
invasion in Blood, skin eruptions during menstruation, 
834
invasion in Lesser-Yang channels
sores on ear, 
584
tinnitus, 
582
invasion with Dryness
dandruff, 
567
hoarse voice/loss of voice, 
606
invasion with Phlegm, mouth ulcers, 
610
invasion with Toxic Heat
gums oozing pus, 
620
swollen neck glands, 
655
swollen tonsils, 
603
2761
Liver and Lung channels, drooping red eye membrane, 
646
Liver channel
corneal opacity, 
647
eyelids loss of control, 
640
prescription, 
954
skin, swollen lips, 
623
Spleen channel, red grains inside eyelids, 
641
Summer-Heat, 
370
tinea, 
786
vs
 
Wind-Cold, 
945
 
, 
954
feeling of cold, 
366
 
, 
366
Wind-Heat at Defensive-Qi level
Chickenpox, 
870
skin rash, 
869-870
Wind-Heat in channels, facial pain, 
571
Wind-Heat in Lung Defensive-Qi portion
acupuncture, 
969
clinical manifestations, 
969
flapping of nostrils, 
870
prescription, 
969
Wind-Heat in skin
herpes zoster, 
786
urticaria, 
784
Wind-Heat invasion
aching nose, 
595
acupuncture, 
966
acute cough, 
659
boil on eyelid, 
639
2762
clinical manifestations, 
966
cold sores, 
610
contracted pupils, 
650
cough in children, 
865
coughing blood, 
661
distension of head feeling, 
562
dry and white teeth, 
617
dry nostrils, 
594
dry throat, 
605
ear discharge, 
583
earache, 
582
ecchymosis under conjunctiva, 
645
eye discharge, 
634
facial pain, 
302-303
fever after childbirth, 
846
flapping alae nasi (nostrils), 
598
headache, 
562
herpes simplex, 
786
hoarse voice, 
820
hot and painful eyes, 
633
inflamed gums, 
618
inverted eyelashes, 
651
itching ears, 
582
itching eyes, 
631
itching tongue, 
613
vs
 
Latent Heat, 
960
nosebleed, 
595
2763
prescription, 
966
red back of ear (children), 
586
red eye corners, 
637
red eyelids, 
637-638
red lips, 
621
red nose, 
590
red philtrum, 
626
red sclera, 
635
redness and pain of scalp, 
568
redness/swelling of pharynx, 
602
runny nose, 
592
scaly eyeballs, 
644
sense of smell loss, 
597
sore throat, 
601
streaming eyes, 
634
swollen eyelids, 
638
yellow complexion, 
577
Wind-Heat invasion in Lesser-Yang channels, ear problems in children, 
865
Wind-Heat with Toxic Heat, spots on back, 
706
Wind invasion
blocked nose, 
591
drooping eyelids, 
640
hot hands, 
681
itching hands, 
683
itching throat, 
605
joint pain, 
318
 
, 
318
joint pain after childbirth, 
844
muffled voice, 
820
2764
neck pain, 
654
nose itching, 
593
nose pain, 
595
numbness of face, 
572
red complexion, 
577
sneezing, 
304
 
, 
591
 
See also
 
residual pathogenic factors
Wind invasion with penetration of Heat at Qi level, convulsions in children, 
871
Wind on Exterior, acute invasion, 
984-985
Wind-Phlegm
clinical manifestations, 
936
contraction of fingers, 
687
cramps in calves, 
701
dark eyelids, 
638
distension feeling in limbs, 
674
dribbling from mouth, 
612
headache, 
290
 
, 
561
hemiplegia, 
711
limb rigidity, 
676
nodules under skin, 
789
numbness/tingling, 
712
of face, 
572
of hands, 
683
in limbs, 
673
slurred speech, 
821
tremor/spasticity of limbs, 
678
unilateral sweating, 
777
 
See also
 
Phlegm
Wind Rampart, 
79
Wind Rash, 
180
2765
Wind-stroke, 
650
Wind-Water invasion
clinical manifestations, 
945
cold and heaviness feeling in lower back, 
704
Wind-Water invasion in Lungs
oedema of body, 
713
oedema of limbs, 
676
oedema of the face, 
572
swollen ears, 
584
swollen fingers, 
686
Wine-Phlegm, 
938
Wiry pulse 
See
 
pulse qualities
Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) Syndrome, 
460
women-fatigue jaundice, 
175
women’s symptoms, 
395-409
Wood
Earth insulting Wood, 
1009
Metal overacting on Wood, 
1008
Water not generating Wood, 
1008
Wood insulting Metal, 
1009
Wood not generating Fire, 
1007-1008
Wood overacting on Earth, 
1008
Wood types
body odour, 
549
 
, 
550
 
, 
550
body shape, 
15-16
 
, 
16,
 
, 
plate 1.2
face, 
plate 1.1
voice, 
542
 
, 
542
worm infestation, 
199
 
, 
597
children, 
869
index finger creases, 
197
 
, 
198
2766
pinworms, 
869
prescriptions, 
912
roundworms, 
869
worry, 
386-387
 
, 
423-424
 
, 
424
depression, 
798
patterns, 
387
propensity to, 
791-792
 
See also
 
anxiety
Wu Hu Tang
 
, 
1045
Wu Ling San
 
, 
1045
Wu Mei Wan
 
, 
1045
Wu Ren Wan
 
, 
1045
Wu Yao San
 
, 
1045
Wu Zhu Yu Tang
 
, 
1045
Wu Zi Yan Zong Wan
 
, 
1046
2767
X
Xi Jiao Di Huang Tang
 
, 
1046
Xiang
 
(images), 
1
Xiang Leng Wan
 
, 
1046
Xiao
 
See
 
wheezing 
(Xiao)
Xiao Chai Hu Tang
 
, 
1046
Xiao Fu
 
, 
145
 
, 
516
Xiao Jian Zhong Tang
 
, 
1046
Xiao Qing Long Tang
 
, 
1046
Xiao Yao San
 
, 
1046
Xie Bai San
 
, 
1046
Xie Fei Mai
 
, 
451
Xie Huang San
 
, 
1046
Xie Xin Tang
 
, 
1047
Xin Fan
 
(‘mental restlessness’), 
239
Xin Yi Qing Fei Yin
 
, 
1047
Xin Zhong Ao Nong
 
(Heart feeling vexed), 
665-666
Xing Su San
 
, 
1047
Xiong Men
 
, 
324
Xu Lao
 
(exhaustion), 
282
Xu Li
 
, 
127-128
 
, 
512
Xuan Fu
 
, 
169
 
, 
170
Xuan Fu Dai Zhe Tang
 
, 
1047
Xue Fu Zhu Yu Tang
 
, 
1047
xyphoid process
abdominal pain, 
328-329
 
, 
329
 
, 
736-737
area under, 
513
 
, 
513
heartbeat below, 
128
 
, 
668
2768
Y
Yan Hu Sou Tang
 
, 
1047
Yang
body shape classification, 
11
 
, 
12-15
Empty-Yang, 
990
Greater Yang stage, 
965-967
nose convergence, 
87
pulse
feeling levels, 
455
organs, 
443-444
 
, 
445
 
, 
445
positions of, 
452-453
 
See also
 
individual organs
Yang, Bright- 
See
 
Bright-Yang
Yang, Clear, not ascending, 
932
Yang, Lesser-
Latent Heat, 
961
pattern, 
284
Yang and Yin 
See
 
Yin and Yang
Yang channels, ears, 
105
Yang collapse
clinical manifestations, 
932
contraction of scrotum, 
769
dilated pupils, 
649
hemiplegia, 
711
hoarse voice, 
820
sweating from collapse, 
776-777
white/pale complexion, 
575-576
Yang deficiency
body shape, 
14
 
, 
14
2769
clinical manifestations, 
932
cold hands and feet, 
672
cold upper back, 
656
with Empty-Cold, 
688
fever in cancer, 
816
floating upwards, sweating on head, 
778
Heart and Lungs, 
814
Kidney, 
814
muscle twitching, 
63
pale eye corners, 
636
pale eyelids, 
638
pale helix, 
585
paralysis, 
62
severe, inverted lips, 
624
small or absent lunulae on nails, 
692
of Stomach and Spleen, 
814
tiredness, acute onset, 
1023
tongue-body colour, 
206
 
, 
210
tongue patterns, 
227-228
white/pale complexion, 
575
Yang Heel Vessel 
(Yang Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yang Linking Vessel 
(Yang Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
 
, 
1005
Yang yellow, 
53
Yang Yin Qing Fei Tang
 
, 
1047
yawning, 
670
Ye Ge
 
(diaphragm choking), 
114
 
, 
726
Yellow Emperor’s Internal Classic, 
434
 
, 
434-435
Yi Gan San
 
, 
1047-1048
Yi Guan Jian
 
, 
1048
2770
Yi Jia Zheng Qi San
 
, 
1048
Yi Wei Tang
 
, 
1048
Yi Yin Jian
 
, 
1048
Yin
body shape classification, 
11
 
, 
12-15
collapse
contraction of scrotum, 
769
hemiplegia, 
711
hoarse voice, 
820
Empty-Yin, 
990
organs
musical correlation, 
539
 
, 
539-540
 
, 
540
smell correlation, 
540
pulse
feeling levels, 
455
organs, 
443-444
 
, 
445
 
, 
445
positions of, 
452-453
 
See also
 
individual organs
Yin, Lesser 
See
 
Lesser-Yin
Yin, Turbid, not descending, clinical manifestations, 
932
Yin and Qi deficient, clinical manifestations, 
933
Yin and Yang
collapse
nosebleed, 
595
sunken eyeball, 
643
deficient, clinical manifestations, 
932
Yin Chen Hao Tang
 
, 
1048
Yin-Cold in abdomen, energy rising feeling in abdomen, 
742
Yin collapse
acupuncture, 
957
2771
clinical manifestations, 
932
 
, 
957
prescription, 
957
Yin deficiency
body shape, 
14
 
, 
14-15
case history, 
1021-1022
chronic, thin neck, 
655
clinical manifestations, 
932
cracked nails, 
688
dry mouth, 
732-733
hot palms and soles, 
866
insomnia, 
348
low-grade fever in children, 
864
night sweating, 
776
paralysis, 
62
Qi deficiency with 
See
 
Qi and Yin deficiency
severe
inverted lips, 
624
redness and erosion of pharynx, 
603
thin abdomen, 
745
tidal fever, 
816
tongue-body colour, 
206
tongue patterns, 
228-230
 
, 
229
weight loss, 
319
 
, 
714
Yin deficiency generating Empty-Wind (Blood level), limb convulsions, 
678
Yin deficiency with Blood-Heat, cracked nipples, 
852
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat
clinical manifestations, 
932
 
, 
1022
dry and cracked lips, 
622
2772
eye discharge, 
634
facial pain, 
571
fever in cancer, 
816
Five-Palm Heat, 
817
and internal Wind, facial pain, 
571
large lunulae on nails, 
692
mental restlessness, 
794
mouth ulcers, 
610
night sweating, 
776
red complexion, 
577
red lips, 
621
redness and erosion of pharynx, 
603
redness inside lower eyelids, 
641
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and Damp-Heat, herpes simplex, 
786
Yin deficiency with Empty-Heat and Dampness, yellow sweat, 
777
Yin deficiency with Phlegm-Fire and Empty-Heat, schizophrenia, 
802
Yin deficiency with Phlegm-Heat, facial pain, 
571-572
Yin excess, closed eyes, 
650
Yin-Fire
heat of the face/hot flushes, 
570
pathology, 
375
 
, 
375
 
, 
376
red complexion, 
577
Yin-Fire from deficiency of Stomach and Spleen and Original Qi, 
888
acupuncture, 
888
clinical manifestations, 
888
prescription, 
888
Yin Heel Vessel 
(Yin Qiao Mai)
 
, 
1004
Yin Linking Vessel 
(Yin Wei Mai)
 
, 
1005
 
, 
1005
Yin organs
2773
manifestations, 
4-5
 
, 
5
Qi transportation sites relationship, 
4
Yin Qiao San
 
, 
1048
Yin Tong
 
(lurking pain), pain classification, 
257
Yin/Yang balance, body shape, 
15
 
, 
15
Yin yellow, 
54
Yin Yu
 
(‘ gloominess/depression’), 
381
Yin–Yang, 
991
You Gui Wan
 
, 
1048-1049
Yu
 
, 
539
Yu Nu Jian
 
, 
1049
Yu Zheng
 
(‘depression pattern’), 
381
Yue Ju Wan
 
, 
1049
2774
Z
Zeng Ye Tang
 
, 
1049
Zhang
 
(‘distension’), 
740
 
See also
 
distension (bloating)
‘
Zhang Tong’
 
(distending pain), 
255-256
Zhen
 
, 
180
Zhen Gan Xi Feng Tang
 
, 
1049
Zhen Ren Yang Zang Tang
 
, 
1049
Zhen Wu Tang
 
, 
1049
Zheng Jia
 
, 
147
 
, 
511
Zheng Qi Tian Xiang San
 
, 
1049
Zhi
 
, 
539
Zhi Bo Di Huang Wan
 
, 
1049
Zhi Gan Cao Tang
 
, 
1050
ZhI Shi Dao Zhi Wan
 
, 
1050
Zhi Shi Gua Lou Gui Zhi Tang
 
, 
1050
Zho Jin Wan
 
, 
1050
Zhu Ye Shi Gao Tang
 
, 
1050
Zong Qi
 
See
 
Gathering-Qi
Zuo Gui Wan
 
, 
1050
Zuo Gui Yin
 
, 
1050
2775
Notes
 
2776
COLOUR PLATES
PLATE 1.1
 
Wood-type face 
(© Roger Ressmeyer/CORBIS)
2777
PLATE 1.2
 
Wood-type body
PLATE 1.3
 
Fire-type face 
(© Dave Bartruff/CORBIS)
2778
PLATE 1.4
 
Earth-type face 
(© Arnie Hodalic/CORBIS)
PLATE 1.5
 
Metal-type face 
(© Wally McNamee/CORBIS)
2779
PLATE 1.6
 
Water-type face 
(© Ric Ergenbright/CORBIS)
2780
PLATE 1.7
 
Water-type body
PLATE 3.1
 
Superficial colour (red)
2781
PLATE 3.2
 
Deep colour (red)
PLATE 3.3
 
Distinct colour (red)
2782
PLATE 3.4
 
Obscure colour (red)
PLATE 3.5
 
Scattered colour (red)
2783
PLATE 3.6
 
Concentrated colour (red)
PLATE 3.7
 
Thin colour (yellow)
2784
PLATE 3.8
 
Thick colour (yellow)
PLATE 3.9
 
Normal complexion colour
2785
PLATE 3.10
 
Bright-white complexion colour
PLATE 3.11
 
Dull-white complexion colour
2786
PLATE 3.12
 
Pale-white complexion colour
PLATE 3.13
 
Sallow-white complexion colour
2787
PLATE 3.14
 
Sallow-white complexion colour
PLATE 3.15
 
Dull-yellow complexion colour
2788
PLATE 3.16
 
Greyish-yellow complexion
PLATE 3.17
 
Floating-yellow complexion colour
2789
PLATE 3.18
 
Dry-yellow complexion colour
PLATE 3.19
 
Ash-like yellow complexion colour
2790
PLATE 3.20
 
Rich-yellow complexion colour
PLATE 3.21
 
Red cheeks
2791
PLATE 3.22
 
Red cheeks
PLATE 3.23
 
Red cheekbones
2792
PLATE 3.24
 
Red cheekbones
PLATE 3.25
 
Floating-red complexion colour
2793
PLATE 3.26
 
Thin-red complexion colour
PLATE 3.27
 
Thick-red complexion colour
2794
PLATE 3.28
 
Superficial-red complexion colour
PLATE 3.29
 
Deep-red complexion colour
2795
PLATE 3.30
 
Distinct-red complexion colour
PLATE 3.31
 
Obscure-red complexion colour
2796
PLATE 3.32
 
Bluish-Greenish complexion colour
PLATE 4.1
 
Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis)
2797
PLATE 6.1
 
Eyes without lustre
PLATE 9.1
 
Swollen ear (also red helix)
2798
PLATE 9.2
 
Red helix (also swollen ear)
PLATE 12.1
 
Horizontal vein in the left eye
2799
PLATE 21.1
 
Purple macules 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.2
 
Macules on lips 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D
and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2800
PLATE 21.3
 
Wheals 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2801
PLATE 21.4
 
Papules 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2802
PLATE 21.5
 
Vesicles 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and Shaw S
1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.6
 
Pustule 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2803
PLATE 21.7
 
Scales 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.8
 
Venous ulcer on the ankle 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2804
PLATE 21.9
 
Necrotic ulcer 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992
An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.10
 
Dermographism 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D
and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2805
PLATE 21.11
 
Acute eczema (dermatitis) 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.12
 
Chronic eczema (dermatitis) 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2806
PLATE 21.13
 
Atopic eczema with secondary bacterial infection
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of
Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2807
PLATE 21.14
 
Atopic eczema with excoriations and lichenification
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of
Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.15
 
Atopic eczema on the knee 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2808
PLATE 21.16
 
‘Dry’ pruritic atopic eczema 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2809
PLATE 21.17
 
Atopic eczema with extensive lichenification 
(Reproduced
with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.18
 
Chronic atopic eczema
2810
PLATE 21.19
 
Chronic eczema (infected)
PLATE 21.20
 
Chronic eczema (infected)
2811
PLATE 21.21
 
Papular-pustular acne 
(Reproduced with permission from
Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.22
 
Pustular acne 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2812
PLATE 21.23
 
Scarring acne 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2813
PLATE 21.24
 
Inflammatory acne 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J
D and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2814
PLATE 21.25
 
Psoriasis with scaly plaques 
(Reproduced with permission
from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2815
PLATE 21.26
 
Pustular psoriasis 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J
D and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2816
PLATE 21.27
 
Psoriasis of scalp 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger
D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.28
 
Psoriasis with pale plaques (Blood deficiency)
2817
PLATE 21.29
 
Psoriasis with bright-red plaques (Blood-Heat and
Dryness) 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and Shaw S 1998
Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2818
PLATE 21.30
 
Psoriasis with purple lesions 
(Blood-Heat and Blood stasis)
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of
Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2819
PLATE 21.31
 
Psoriasis with pale and dry-scaly plaques (Blood
deficient and dry with Wind) 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.32
 
Urticaria 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2820
PLATE 21.33
 
Chronic urticaria 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2821
PLATE 21.34
 
Naevus (spider angioma) 
(Reproduced with permission from
Wilkinson J D and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2822
PLATE 21.35
 
Superficial spreading malignant melanoma 
(Reproduced
with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.36
 
Nodular malignant melanoma 
(Reproduced with permission
from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2823
PLATE 21.37
 
Malignant melanoma (lentigo maligna) 
(Reproduced with
permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.38
 
Acral lentiginous malignant melanoma 
(Reproduced with
permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2824
PLATE 21.39
 
Superficial spreading malignant melanoma 
(Reproduced
with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.40
 
Tinea corporis due to ringworm 
(Reproduced with permission
from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2825
PLATE 21.41
 
Tinea corporis with central clearing 
(Reproduced with
permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.42
 
Tinea manuum 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2826
PLATE 21.43
 
Tinea capitis 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and
Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2827
PLATE 21.44
 
Tinea pedis 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and
Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.45
 
Tinea cruris 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and
Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2828
PLATE 21.46
 
Candida albicans
 
in the interdigital cleft 
(Reproduced with
permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.47
 
Candida albicans
 
on the neck 
(Reproduced with permission
from Wilkinson J D and Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh)
Churchill Livingstone
2829
PLATE 21.48
 
Herpes simplex on the cheek 
(Reproduced with permission
from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
2830
PLATE 21.49
 
Herpes simplex on the genitals 
(Reproduced with permission
from Gawkrodger D 1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 21.50
 
Herpes zoster 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2831
PLATE 21.51
 
Wart on hand 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
PLATE 21.52
 
Plane viral warts 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2832
PLATE 21.53
 
Genital warts 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D
1992 An Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2833
PLATE 21.54
 
Rosacea 
(Reproduced with permission from Gawkrodger D 1992 An
Illustrated Colour Text of Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill
Livingstone
2834
PLATE 21.55
 
Acne rosacea 
(Reproduced with permission from Wilkinson J D and
Shaw S 1998 Dermatology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh) Churchill Livingstone
PLATE 24.1
 
Pale tongue
2835
PLATE 24.2
 
Red tongue
PLATE 24.3
 
Red tip
2836
PLATE 24.4
 
Red sides (Liver areas)
PLATE 24.5
 
Red points
2837
PLATE 24.6
 
Reddish-Purple tongue
PLATE 24.7
 
Bluish-Purple (right side) tongue
2838
PLATE 24.8
 
Purple colour in Liver areas
PLATE 24.9
 
Purple colour in breast/chest area
2839
PLATE 24.10
 
Sublingual veins
PLATE 25.1
 
Swollen tongue body
2840
PLATE 25.2
 
Swelling front third of tongue (Lung area)
PLATE 25.3
 
Stiff tongue body (this tongue is also very Purple)
2841
PLATE 25.4
 
Irregular cracks
PLATE 25.5
 
Stomach crack
2842
PLATE 25.6
 
Heart crack
PLATE 25.7
 
Heart crack
2843
PLATE 25.8
 
Teethmarks
2844
PLATE 26.1A,B
 
Coating without root; 
c
 
Coating without root (in
Gall-Bladder area)
2845
PLATE 26.2
 
Coating in Gall-Bladder area
PLATE 26.3
 
Sticky coating
2846
PLATE 27.1
 
Swelling on tongue sides from Spleen-Qi deficiency
2847
Πίνακας Περιεχομένων
Title page
2
Table of Contents
4
Copyright page
55
To the memory of my parents
57
Foreword
59
Preface
64
Acknowledgements
69
Note on the translation of Chinese terms
70
How to use this book
73
Index of symptoms and signs
78
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
119
PART 1: DIAGNOSIS BY OBSERVATION
120
DIAGNOSIS BY OBSERVATION
121
INTRODUCTION
122
SECTION 1: OBSERVATION OF THE BODY, MIND AND
COMPLEXION
133
OBSERVATION OF THE BODY, MIND AND
COMPLEXION
134
INTRODUCTION
134
Chapter 1: OBSERVATION OF THE BODY SHAPE,
PHYSIQUE AND DEMEANOUR
142
INTRODUCTION
143
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO
YIN AND YANG
145
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO
THE FIVE ELEMENTS
154
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO
PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL INFLUENCES
169
CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO BODY BUILD
179
CLASSIFICATION OF BODY SHAPE ACCORDING TO
PAIN AND DRUG TOLERANCE
185
2848
Chapter 2: OBSERVATION OF THE MIND, SPIRIT AND
EMOTIONS
190
INTRODUCTION
191
THE THREE ASPECTS OF THE SPIRIT
193
THE THREE CONDITIONS OF THE SPIRIT
196
THE SPIRIT AND CONSTITUTION
199
THE SPIRIT AND THE EMOTIONS
202
Chapter 3: OBSERVATION OF THE COMPLEXION
COLOUR
206
INTRODUCTION
207
DOMINANT AND GUEST COLOURS
209
OBSERVATION OF DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF
COMPLEXION COLOUR
213
COMPLEXION COLOURS
233
Chapter 4: OBSERVATION OF BODY MOVEMENTS
253
HEAD
254
FACE
256
LIMBS AND BODY
259
SECTION 2: OBSERVATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
269
OBSERVATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
270
INTRODUCTION
271
Chapter 5: OBSERVATION OF HEAD, FACE AND HAIR
272
HEAD
273
FACE
276
HAIR
279
Chapter 6: OBSERVATION OF THE EYES
285
INTRODUCTION
286
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EYES
288
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE INTERNAL ORGANS
AND THE EYES
290
ASPECTS OF OBSERVATION OF THE EYES
298
OBSERVATION OF PATHOLOGICAL SIGNS OF THE
EYE
299
Chapter 7: OBSERVATION OF THE NOSE
313
INTRODUCTION
314
2849
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE NOSE
314
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE NOSE AND THE
INTERNAL ORGANS
317
ABNORMAL COLOUR
317
SWOLLEN NOSE
321
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE
NOSTRILS)
321
DRY NOSTRILS
321
NOSEBLEED
321
POLYPS
322
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
322
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
322
Chapter 8: OBSERVATION OF LIPS MOUTH, PALATE,
TEETH, GUMS AND PHILTRUM
323
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE MOUTH AND LIPS
324
LIPS
327
MOUTH
332
PALATE
337
TEETH AND GUMS
339
PHILTRUM
344
Chapter 9: OBSERVATION OF THE EARS
349
INTRODUCTION
350
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE EARS
350
EAR SIZE
353
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
354
SORES ON THE EAR
354
WARTS ON THE EAR
354
ABNORMAL COLOUR
355
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
356
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
356
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
357
Chapter 10: OBSERVATION OF THE THROAT AND
NECK
359
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND
NECK
360
2850
THROAT
361
NECK
366
Chapter 11: OBSERVATION OF THE BACK
374
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BACK
375
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
377
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
377
SPINAL CURVE ABNORMALITIES
378
SKIN SIGNS
383
Chapter 12: OBSERVATION OF WOMEN&#x2019;S
BREASTS
385
INTRODUCTION
386
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE BREASTS
386
BREAST SIZE
387
BREAST LUMPS
388
NIPPLE ABNORMALITIES
393
PEAU D&#x2019;ORANGE SKIN
394
Chapter 13: OBSERVATION OF THE HEARTBEAT
396
INTRODUCTION
396
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED DOWNWARDS
398
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED UPWARDS
398
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE LEFT
398
HEARTBEAT DISPLACED TO THE RIGHT
399
HEARTBEAT BELOW THE XYPHOID PROCESS
399
Chapter 14: OBSERVATION OF THE HANDS
401
INTRODUCTION
402
ABNORMAL COLOUR
402
VENULES ON THE THENAR EMINENCE
403
ATROPHY OF THE THENAR EMINENCE
403
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES OF THE DORSUM OF
THE HANDS
404
TREMOR OF THE HANDS
404
TINEA (RINGWORM)
405
THE FINGERS
405
DEFORMED KNUCKLES
410
2851
THE PALMS
411
Chapter 15: OBSERVATION OF THE NAILS
420
INTRODUCTION
421
SURFACE ABNORMALITIES
422
TWISTED NAILS
425
CURLING NAILS
425
NAILS FALLING OFF
425
ABNORMAL COLOUR
426
LUNULAE
427
CORRESPONDENCE OF NAILS TO ORGAN
SYSTEMS
429
Chapter 16: OBSERVATION OF THE CHEST AND
ABDOMEN
435
CHEST
436
ABDOMEN
441
Chapter 17: OBSERVATION OF THE GENITALIA
448
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE GENITALIA
449
PUBIC HAIR
450
PENIS
451
SCROTUM
452
VULVA AND VAGINA
454
Chapter 18: OBSERVATION OF THE FOUR LIMBS
455
INTRODUCTION
456
ATROPHY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
456
FLACCIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
457
RIGIDITY OF THE FOUR LIMBS
458
PARALYSIS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
459
LIMB MOVEMENTS
459
OEDEMA OF THE FOUR LIMBS
463
SWELLING OF THE JOINTS OF THE FOUR LIMBS
464
Chapter 19: OBSERVATION OF THE LEGS
466
LEG SIGNS
467
GAIT
470
Chapter 20: OBSERVATION OF THE EXCRETIONS
472
2852
INTRODUCTION
473
SPUTUM
473
NASAL DISCHARGE
474
SWEAT
475
STOOLS
476
URINE
478
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
478
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
480
Chapter 21: OBSERVATION OF THE SKIN
482
INTRODUCTION
484
THE SKIN AND THE INTERNAL ORGANS
487
SKIN SIGNS
493
SKIN DISEASES
508
Chapter 22: OBSERVATION IN CHILDREN
532
INTRODUCTION
533
COMPLEXION
533
ORIFICES
535
BODY MOVEMENT
539
SPINAL MUSCLES
539
INDEX FINGER
540
ROOT OF THE NOSE
553
SECTION 3: TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
555
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
556
INTRODUCTION
556
Chapter 23: TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
558
CONDITIONS FOR EXAMINING THE TONGUE
558
AREAS OF THE TONGUE
561
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TONGUE
566
Chapter 24: TONGUE-BODY COLOUR
569
TONGUE SPIRIT
569
TONGUE-BODY COLOURS
570
SUBLINGUAL VEINS
580
Chapter 25: TONGUE-BODY SHAPE
583
INTRODUCTION
583
2853
THIN
584
SWOLLEN
584
PARTIALLY SWOLLEN
585
STIFF
587
FLACCID
587
LONG
587
SHORT
587
CRACKED
587
DEVIATED
591
MOVING
591
QUIVERING
592
TOOTHMARKED
592
Chapter 26: TONGUE COATING
594
PHYSIOLOGY OF TONGUE COATING
594
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF TONGUE COATING
595
PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF COATING
596
COATING WITH OR WITHOUT ROOT
597
COATING THICKNESS
598
COATING DISTRIBUTION
599
COATING MOISTURE
600
COATING TEXTURE
600
TONGUE COATING IN EXTERNAL DISEASES
602
Chapter 27: TONGUE IMAGES AND PATTERNS
603
QI-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
603
YANG-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
604
BLOOD-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
605
YIN-DEFICIENCY TONGUES
605
THE TONGUE IN PHLEGM AND DAMPNESS
610
THE TONGUE IN HEAT
610
THE TONGUE IN COLD
612
THE TONGUE IN QI AND BLOOD STAGNATION
612
THE TONGUE IN INTERNAL WIND
613
THE TONGUE IN EXTERNAL INVASIONS OF WIND
613
PART 2: DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
614
2854
DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
615
INTRODUCTION
616
Chapter 28: INTRODUCTION
618
NATURE OF DIAGNOSIS BY INTERROGATION
619
NATURE OF &#x201C;SYMPTOMS&#x201D; IN
CHINESE MEDICINE
621
THE ART OF INTERROGATION: ASKING THE RIGHT
QUESTIONS
623
TERMINOLOGY PROBLEMS IN INTERROGATION
625
PATIENTS&#x2019; EXPRESSIONS
627
PITFALLS TO AVOID IN INTERROGATION
628
PROCEDURE FOR INTERROGATION
630
TIME SCALE OF SYMPTOMS
632
INTEGRATION OF INTERROGATION WITH
OBSERVATION
633
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS AND
INTERROGATION
634
TONGUE AND PULSE DIAGNOSIS: INTEGRATION
WITH INTERROGATION
635
THE 10 TRADITIONAL QUESTIONS
648
THE 16 QUESTIONS
652
Chapter 29: PAIN
655
INTRODUCTION
656
WHY WE ASK
656
WHEN WE ASK
657
HOW WE ASK
657
AREA OF PAIN
659
NATURE OF PAIN
659
TIME OF PAIN
666
FACTORS AFFECTING PAIN
666
ORGAN VERSUS CHANNEL PAIN
669
Chapter 30: FOOD AND TASTE
672
INTRODUCTION
673
WHY WE ASK
673
WHEN WE ASK
673
2855
HOW WE ASK
673
MAIN PATTERNS OF DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
674
FOOD
677
APPETITE
678
TASTE
680
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
682
BELCHING
683
SOUR REGURGITATION
684
Chapter 31: STOOLS AND URINE
686
INTRODUCTION
687
WHY WE ASK
687
WHEN WE ASK
687
HOW WE ASK
687
STOOLS
688
URINE
698
Chapter 32: THIRST AND DRINK
702
INTRODUCTION
702
WHY WE ASK
702
WHEN WE ASK
703
HOW WE ASK
703
THIRST
704
DRY MOUTH
706
PREFERENCE FOR HOT OR COLD DRINKS
706
ABSENCE OF THIRST
707
Chapter 33: ENERGY LEVELS
708
INTRODUCTION
708
WHY WE ASK
708
WHEN WE ASK
708
HOW WE ASK
709
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
709
PATTERNS CAUSING TIREDNESS
711
Chapter 34: HEAD
722
INTRODUCTION
723
WHY WE ASK
723
2856
WHEN WE ASK
723
HOW WE ASK
724
HEADACHE
724
DIZZINESS
740
WHY WE ASK
740
WHEN WE ASK
740
HOW WE ASK
740
FAINTING
743
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE HEAD
744
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE HEAD
745
FEELING OF MUZZINESS (FUZZINESS) OF THE HEAD
747
BRAIN NOISE
747
FEELING OF COLD OF THE HEAD
749
FEELING OF HEAT OF THE HEAD
749
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE SKIN OF THE HEAD
750
ITCHY SCALP
751
Chapter 35: FACE
752
INTRODUCTION
753
WHY WE ASK
753
WHEN WE ASK
754
HOW WE ASK
754
FACE
754
NOSE
758
TEETH AND GUMS
765
MOUTH AND LIPS
769
TONGUE
771
Chapter 36: THROAT AND NECK
773
INTRODUCTION
773
WHY WE ASK
774
WHEN WE ASK
774
HOW WE ASK
775
CHANNELS INFLUENCING THE THROAT AND NECK
775
THROAT
775
NECK
783
2857
Chapter 37: BODY
786
INTRODUCTION
786
WHY WE ASK
786
WHEN WE ASK
787
HOW WE ASK
787
ACHES IN THE WHOLE BODY
787
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
788
LOWER BACKACHE
789
NUMBNESS/TINGLING
790
ITCHING
790
LOSS OF WEIGHT
791
OBESITY
792
Chapter 38: CHEST AND ABDOMEN
793
CHEST
794
WHY WE ASK
794
WHEN WE ASK
794
HOW WE ASK
794
ABDOMEN
804
WHY WE ASK
804
WHEN WE ASK
805
HOW WE ASK
805
Chapter 39: LIMBS
825
INTRODUCTION
826
WHY WE ASK
826
WHEN WE ASK
826
HOW WE ASK
827
WEAKNESS OF THE LIMBS
827
DIFFICULTY IN WALKING (ATROPHY/FLACCIDITY OF
LIMBS
828
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE LIMBS
828
FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LIMBS
830
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
830
NUMBNESS/TINGLING OF THE LIMBS
830
GENERALIZED JOINT PAIN
831
2858
TREMOR OF THE LIMBS
834
UPPER LIMBS
836
LOWER LIMBS
842
Chapter 40: SLEEP
847
INTRODUCTION
847
WHY WE ASK
847
WHEN WE ASK
848
HOW WE ASK
848
INSOMNIA
848
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
853
SOMNOLENCE
855
Chapter 41: SWEATING
856
INTRODUCTION
856
WHY WE ASK
857
WHEN WE ASK
857
HOW WE ASK
858
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SWEATING
858
PATHOLOGY OF SWEATING
859
CLASSIFICATION OF SWEATING
860
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
862
Chapter 42: EARS AND EYES
863
EARS
863
WHY WE ASK
864
WHEN WE ASK
864
HOW WE ASK
864
EYES
869
WHY WE ASK
869
WHEN WE ASK
869
HOW WE ASK
870
Chapter 43: FEELING OF COLD, FEELING OF HEAT AND
FEVER
876
INTRODUCTION
877
WHY WE ASK
877
WHEN WE ASK
878
2859
HOW WE ASK
878
FEELING OF COLD
880
SIMULTANEOUS FEELING OF COLD AND FEVER IN
EXTERIOR CONDITIONS
891
ALTERNATING FEELING OF COLD AND FEELING OF
HEAT
899
FEELING OF HEAT FROM INTERNAL CAUSES
901
INTERIOR FEVER
902
FIVE-PALM HEAT
911
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT IN
INTERNAL CONDITIONS
912
Chapter 44: MENTAL&#x2014;EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
916
INTRODUCTION
917
WHY WE ASK
917
WHEN WE ASK
917
HOW WE ASK
919
DEPRESSION
919
FEAR/ANXIETY
928
IRRITABILITY/ANGER
932
WORRY/OVERTHINKING
934
SADNESS/GRIEF
935
EXCESS JOY
938
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
940
Chapter 45: SEXUAL SYMPTOMS
942
INTRODUCTION
942
WHY WE ASK
943
WHEN WE ASK
943
HOW WE ASK
943
MEN
944
WOMEN
947
Chapter 46: WOMEN&#x2019;S SYMPTOMS
950
INTRODUCTION
951
WHY WE ASK
951
WHEN WE ASK
951
HOW WE ASK
952
2860
THE GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY
952
BREAST SYMPTOMS
954
MENSTRUATION
959
PREGNANCY AND CHILDBIRTH
977
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
984
Chapter 47: CHILDREN&#x2019;S SYMPTOMS
986
INTRODUCTION
986
MOTHER&#x2019;S PREGNANCY
987
CHILDBIRTH
987
POSTPARTUM PROBLEMS
988
CHILDHOOD DISEASES
988
DIGESTIVE SYMPTOMS
988
IMMUNIZATIONS
989
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS AND EARACHE
989
SLEEP
991
SLOW DEVELOPMENT
991
Chapter 48: DIAGNOSING THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
993
INTRODUCTION
994
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CAUSES OF DISEASE
996
THE FIVE STAGES OF LIFE
997
THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
1001
PART 3: DIAGNOSIS BY PALPATION
1031
DIAGNOSIS BY PALPATION
1032
INTRODUCTION
1032
Chapter 49: PULSE DIAGNOSIS
1034
INTRODUCTION
1036
THE &#x2018;NINE REGIONS&#x2019; OF THE PULSE
FROM THE &#x2018;YELLOW EMPEROR&#x2019;S
CLASSIC OF INTERNAL MEDICINE&#x2019;
1038
THE PULSE IN THE &#x2018;CLASSIC OF
DIFFICULTIES&#x2019;
1039
THE THREE SECTIONS OF THE PULSE
1042
ASSIGNMENT OF PULSE POSITIONS TO ORGANS
1046
THE THREE LEVELS
1059
2861
METHOD OF PULSE TAKING
1062
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PULSE
1068
ATTRIBUTES OF THE NORMAL PULSE
1074
GUIDELINES FOR INTERPRETING THE PULSE
1079
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
1085
INTEGRATION OF PULSE AND TONGUE DIAGNOSIS
1099
LIMITATIONS OF PULSE DIAGNOSIS
1101
Chapter 50: PULSE QUALITIES
1105
Chapter 51: PALPATION OF PARTS OF THE BODY
1230
INTRODUCTION
1231
PALPATION OF THE CHEST AND ABDOMEN
1232
PALPATION OF THE SKIN
1246
PALPATION OF HANDS AND FEET
1254
PALPATION OF ACUPUNCTURE POINTS
1257
Chapter 52: PALPATION OF CHANNELS
1264
INTRODUCTION
1265
CONNECTING CHANNELS
1265
MUSCLE CHANNELS
1268
PALPATION OF THE CHANNELS IN PAINFUL
OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME (BI)
1270
PALPATION OF CHANNELS
1270
PART 4: DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING AND
SMELLING
1297
DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING AND SMELLING
1298
INTRODUCTION
1298
Chapter 53: DIAGNOSIS BY HEARING
1301
INTRODUCTION
1302
VOICE
1302
SPEECH
1308
CRYING IN BABIES
1309
BREATHING AND SIGHING
1310
COUGHING AND SNEEZING
1312
HICCUP
1314
BELCHING
1314
2862
VOMITING
1315
Chapter 54: DIAGNOSIS BY SMELLING
1317
INTRODUCTION
1317
BODY ODOUR
1318
ODOUR OF BODILY SECRETIONS
1319
PART 5: SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1322
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1323
INTRODUCTION
1325
SECTION 1: SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF PARTS OF THE
BODY
1329
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS OF PARTS OF THE BODY
1330
INTRODUCTION
1331
Chapter 55: HEAD, HAIR AND FACE
1333
HEAD
1335
Hair and scalp
1348
Face
1358
Chapter 56: FACE COLOUR
1371
WHITE/PALE
1371
YELLOW
1373
RED
1375
BLUISH/GREENISH
1377
PURPLE
1378
DARK
1378
SALLOW
1379
BLUSHING
1380
Chapter 57: EARS
1382
TINNITUS/DEAFNESS
1383
ITCHY EARS
1384
EARACHE
1385
BLEEDING FROM THE EARS
1386
DISCHARGE FROM THE EARS
1387
EXCESSIVE WAX PRODUCTION
1388
ABNORMAL SIZE
1389
DRY AND CONTRACTED HELIX
1390
2863
SORES ON THE EAR
1390
WARTS ON THE EAR
1391
ABNORMAL HELIX COLOUR
1391
RED BACK OF THE EAR
1394
DISTENDED BLOOD VESSELS ON THE EAR
1394
SWELLING AND REDNESS OF THE CONCHA
1395
Chapter 58: NOSE
1397
ABNORMAL COLOUR
1398
SNEEZING
1402
BLOCKED NOSE
1403
RUNNY NOSE
1405
ITCHY NOSE
1406
DRY NOSTRILS
1408
NOSEBLEED
1410
NOSE ACHE
1411
NOSE PAIN
1412
SWOLLEN NOSE
1413
BAD SMELL
1416
LOSS OF SENSE OF SMELL
1417
POLYPS
1418
FLAPPING ALAE NASI (THE OUTSIDE OF THE
NOSTRILS)
1419
ULCERS ON THE NOSE
1419
PAPULES ON THE NOSE
1420
Chapter 59: THROAT
1422
SORE THROAT
1422
REDNESS OF THE PHARYNX
1424
REDNESS AND SWELLING OF THE PHARYNX
1425
REDNESS AND EROSION OF THE PHARYNX
1426
SWOLLEN TONSILS
1427
PHLEGM IN THE THROAT
1428
GOITRE (swelling of the sides of the neck
1429
ITCHY THROAT
1431
DRY THROAT
1431
2864
HOARSE VOICE OR LOSS OF VOICE
1433
WHITE PURULENT SPOTS IN THE THROAT
1434
FEELING OF OBSTRUCTION OF THE THROAT
1436
REDNESS ON THE THROAT
1437
Chapter 60: MOUTH, TONGUE, TEETH, GUMS, LIPS,
PALATE AND PHILTRUM
1440
MOUTH
1443
TONGUE
1451
TEETH
1455
GUMS
1464
LIPS
1469
PALATE
1478
PHILTRUM
1480
Chapter 61: EYES
1484
VISION
1486
ITCHY EYES
1494
DRY EYES
1496
HOT AND PAINFUL EYES
1497
STREAMING EYES
1499
DISCHARGE FROM THE EYES
1501
EYE COLOUR
1503
EYELIDS
1509
GLAUCOMA
1519
FEELING OF DISTENSION OF THE EYES
1520
EYEBALL
1521
ECCHYMOSIS UNDER CONJUNCTIVA
1527
RED VEINS/MEMBRANE
1528
CORNEA
1532
WHITE SPECKS
1533
PUPILS
1534
STARING, FIXED EYES
1540
CLOSED EYES
1540
OPEN EYES
1540
INVERTED EYELASHES
1541
2865
CATARACT
1542
Chapter 62: NECK, SHOULDERS AND UPPER BACK
1543
NECK AND SHOULDERS
1544
UPPER BACK
1550
Chapter 63: CHEST
1553
COUGH
1554
BREATHLESSNESS
1559
WHEEZING
1562
PAIN
1563
FEELINGS IN THE CHEST AND HEART
1566
PALPITATIONS
1571
DISPLACED HEARTBEAT
1573
ABNORMAL CHEST SHAPE
1576
GYNAECOMASTIA
1579
YAWNING
1579
SIGHING
1580
Chapter 64: LIMBS
1582
MUSCLE ACHE IN THE LIMBS
1583
PAIN IN THE LIMBS
1584
HANDS AND FEET
1585
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE LIMBS
1587
WEAKNESS AND ATROPHY
1590
LIMB SWELLING
1593
LIMB MOVEMENT
1595
Chapter 65: ARMS
1602
PAIN IN THE ELBOW
1604
HANDS
1605
FINGERS
1620
NAILS
1625
Chapter 66: LEGS
1637
FEET
1638
ATROPHY OF THE LEGS
1640
PARALYSIS OF THE LEGS
1642
GAIT
1643
2866
ARCHED LEGS
1646
PAIN
1646
KNEES
1651
WEAKNESS OF THE LEGS
1652
A FEELING OF HEAVINESS OF THE LEGS
1653
RESTLESS LEGS
1654
TREMOR OF THE LEGS
1655
CRAMPS IN THE CALVES
1656
LOWER LEG ULCERS
1657
TOE ULCERS
1658
BURNING SENSATION IN THE SOLES
1658
Chapter 67: LOWER BACK
1660
LOWER BACKACHE
1661
SCIATICA
1662
FEELING OF COLD AND HEAVINESS OF THE
LOWER BACK
1663
WEAKNESS OF THE LOWER BACK AND KNEES
1664
STIFFNESS OF THE LOWER BACK
1665
COCCYX PAIN
1665
ATROPHY OF THE MUSCLES ALONG THE SPINE
1666
RIGIDITY OF THE LOWER BACK
1666
SKIN SIGNS
1667
SPINAL CURVATURE
1670
Chapter 68: BODY
1675
BODY ACHES
1675
PAIN IN THE JOINTS
1677
LOSS OF FEELING
1677
ITCHING
1684
OEDEMA
1685
WEIGHT CHANGE
1686
JAUNDICE
1687
TWITCHING OF MUSCLES
1688
OPISTHOTONOS
1689
Chapter 69: DIGESTIVE SYSTEM AND TASTE
1690
2867
BELCHING
1691
REGURGITATION
1692
HICCUP
1695
HUNGER AND EATING
1696
SLEEPINESS AFTER EATING
1704
NAUSEA, RETCHING AND VOMITING
1704
TASTE
1713
Chapter 70: THIRST AND DRINK
1719
THIRST
1719
DRY MOUTH
1722
ABSENCE OF THIRST
1723
INCREASED SALIVATION
1724
Chapter 71: ABDOMEN
1725
INTRODUCTION
1726
PAIN
1727
DISTENSION AND FULLNESS
1739
ABNORMAL FEELINGS IN THE ABDOMEN
1741
BORBORYGMI
1743
FLATULENCE
1744
SKIN SIGNS
1745
ABDOMINAL MASSES
1746
OEDEMA OF THE ABDOMEN
1748
ABDOMINAL SIZE
1749
SAGGING LOWER ABDOMEN
1750
UMBILICUS
1750
Chapter 72: DEFECATION
1752
DIARRHOEA OR LOOSE STOOLS
1752
DIARRHOEA WITH VOMITING
1754
CONSTIPATION
1755
ALTERNATION OF CONSTIPATION AND LOOSE
STOOLS
1758
INCONTINENCE OF FAECES
1759
BLOOD AND MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
1759
MUCUS IN THE STOOLS
1761
2868
BLOOD IN THE STOOLS
1761
DIFFICULTY IN DEFECATION
1762
STRAINING IN DEFECATION
1763
Chapter 73: URINATION
1766
DARK URINE
1766
PALE AND ABUNDANT URINE
1768
TURBID URINE
1768
PAINFUL URINATION
1769
SCANTY AND DIFFICULT URINATION
1770
DIFFICULT URINATION
1772
FREQUENT URINATION
1773
DRIBBLING OF URINE
1774
INCONTINENCE OF URINE
1775
NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
1776
URINATION AT NIGHT
1777
BLOOD IN THE URINE
1778
SPERM IN THE URINE
1779
Chapter 74: ANUS
1781
ITCHING OF THE ANUS
1781
HAEMORRHOIDS
1782
ANAL PROLAPSE
1783
ANAL FISSURE
1783
ANAL FISTULA
1784
ANAL ULCERS
1784
Chapter 75: MEN&#x2019;S SEXUAL AND GENITAL
SYMPTOMS
1786
IMPOTENCE
1787
LACK OF LIBIDO
1789
EJACULATION
1790
PRIAPISM
1795
COLD GENITALS
1795
SCROTUM
1796
PENIS
1801
SWELLING AND PAIN OF THE TESTICLES
1806
2869
PUBIC HAIR
1806
Chapter 76: SWEATING
1808
SPONTANEOUS SWEATING
1808
NIGHT SWEATING
1810
SWEATING FROM COLLAPSE
1811
YELLOW SWEAT
1812
LOCALIZED SWEATING
1813
ABSENCE OF SWEATING
1819
Chapter 77: SKIN SIGNS
1821
GREASY SKIN
1822
DRY SKIN
1823
ERUPTIONS
1825
INFECTIONS
1832
GROWTHS AND MASSES
1836
NECK ULCERS
1839
Chapter 78: EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
1841
PROPENSITY TO ANGER
1841
PROPENSITY TO WORRY
1842
SADNESS
1844
FEAR/ANXIETY
1845
TENDENCY TO BE EASILY STARTLED
1846
EXCESS JOY
1847
MENTAL RESTLESSNESS
1848
SEVERE TIMIDITY
1849
INAPPROPRIATE LAUGHTER
1850
Chapter 79: MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS
1852
DEPRESSION
1852
DEPRESSION AND MANIC BEHAVIOUR
1855
ANXIETY
1857
IRRITABILITY
1860
SCHIZOPHRENIA
1863
Chapter 80: MENTAL DIFFICULTIES
1865
POOR MEMORY
1865
DIFFICULTY IN CONCENTRATION
1866
2870
LEARNING DIFFICULTY IN CHILDREN
1867
HYPERACTIVITY
1868
Chapter 81: SLEEP PROBLEMS
1870
INSOMNIA
1870
EXCESSIVE DREAMING
1873
SOMNOLENCE
1876
SLEEP TALKING
1877
SLEEP WALKING
1878
SNORING
1879
Chapter 82: FEELING OF COLD, FEELING OF HEAT,
FEVER
1882
FEELING OF COLD, SHIVERING
1883
FEVER
1885
FIVE-PALM HEAT
1891
CONTRADICTORY FEELINGS OF COLD AND HEAT
1893
Chapter 83: VOICE, SPEECH AND SOUNDS
1895
LOUD VOICE
1895
WEAK VOICE
1896
MUFFLED VOICE
1897
HOARSE VOICE
1897
NASAL VOICE
1898
SNORING
1899
SLURRED SPEECH
1900
INCOHERENT, INCESSANT SPEECH
1901
MUTTERING TO ONESELF
1901
DELIRIOUS SPEECH
1901
DIFFICULTY IN FINDING WORDS
1902
STUTTERING
1902
GROANING
1903
CRYING OUT
1903
SECTION 2: GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1904
GYNAECOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1905
INTRODUCTION
1905
Chapter 84: MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS
1907
2871
MENSTRUAL BLOOD
1908
PERIODS
1911
Chapter 85: PROBLEMS AT PERIOD TIME
1921
PREMENSTRUAL TENSION
1922
HEADACHE
1923
BREAST DISTENSION
1924
FEVER
1926
BODY ACHES
1926
OEDEMA
1927
DIARRHOEA
1927
CONSTIPATION
1928
NOSEBLEED
1928
MOUTH ULCERS
1929
SKIN ERUPTIONS
1930
DIZZINESS
1930
VOMITING
1930
INSOMNIA
1931
EYE PAIN
1932
Chapter 86: PROBLEMS DURING PREGNANCY
1933
MORNING SICKNESS
1934
VAGINAL BLEEDING
1935
ABDOMINAL PAIN
1936
OEDEMA
1937
URINATION PROBLEMS
1937
CONSTIPATION
1939
ANXIETY
1940
DIZZINESS
1941
COUGH
1941
LOSS OF VOICE
1942
FEELING OF SUFFOCATION
1942
CONVULSIONS (ECLAMPSIA)
1943
PROBLEMS WITH THE FETUS
1943
Chapter 87: PROBLEMS AFTER CHILDBIRTH
1947
RETENTION OF PLACENTA
1948
2872
LOCHIA
1949
PAIN
1950
VAGINAL BLEEDING
1952
URINARY DIFFICULTY
1953
CONSTIPATION
1954
SWEATING
1954
DIZZINESS
1955
OEDEMA
1955
FEVER
1956
BREAST MILK
1957
POSTNATAL DEPRESSION/PSYCHOSIS
1958
COLLAPSE
1959
CONVULSIONS
1959
Chapter 88: BREAST SIGNS
1960
BREAST DISTENSION AND SWELLING
1961
BREAST PAIN
1963
BREAST LUMPS
1963
NIPPLES
1965
PEAU D&#x2019; ORANGE SKIN
1967
SMALL BREASTS
1968
Chapter 89: MISCELLANEOUS GYNAECOLOGICAL
SYMPTOMS
1970
INFERTILITY
1971
MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME
1972
ABDOMINAL MASSES
1974
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
1975
INFLAMMATION AND SWELLING
1977
PROLAPSE
1979
LEUKOPLAKIA
1980
DYSPAREUNIA
1981
BLEEDING ON INTERCOURSE
1982
LACK OF LIBIDO
1982
PUBIC HAIR
1983
SECTION 3: PAEDIATRIC SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1985
2873
PAEDIATRIC SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
1986
INTRODUCTION
1986
Chapter 90: CHILDREN&#x2019;S PROBLEMS
1988
FEVER
1990
VOMITING
1992
DIARRHOEA
1992
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
1993
EAR PROBLEMS
1995
HOT PALMS AND SOLES
1996
CONSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESS
1997
CONSTIPATION IN INFANCY
1998
URINATION PROBLEMS
1998
CRYING
2000
DISTURBED SLEEP
2001
ACCUMULATION DISORDER
2002
WORMS
2003
FIVE FLACCIDITIES
2003
FIVE RETARDATIONS
2004
INFLAMMATIONS
2004
JAUNDICE
2005
INFECTIONS
2005
FLAPPING OF NOSTRILS
2006
CONVULSIONS
2007
FETUS TOXIN
2008
FONTANELLES
2009
WHITE SPOTS ON THE PALATE AND TONGUE
2010
LONG PENIS
2010
PART 6: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
2012
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
2013
INTRODUCTION
2014
SECTION 1: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING
TO THE INTERNAL ORGANS
2020
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO THE
INTERNAL ORGANS
2021
2874
INTRODUCTION
2022
Chapter 91: HEART
2026
HEART-QI DEFICIENCY
2027
HEART-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2027
HEART-YANG COLLAPSE
2029
HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
2029
HEART-QI AND HEART-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
2030
HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2030
HEART-QI AND HEART-YIN DEFICIENCY
2032
DEFICIENCY OF BOTH HEART-YANG AND HEART-
YIN
2032
HEART-QI STAGNATION
2033
HEART-FIRE BLAZING
2034
PHLEGM PATTERNS
2034
HEART-BLOOD STASIS
2036
HEART VESSEL OBSTRUCTION
2036
WATER OVERFLOWING TO THE HEART
2037
TURBID DAMPNESS SURROUNDING THE HEART
2038
COMBINED PATTERNS
2038
Chapter 92: SPLEEN
2040
SPLEEN-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2041
SPLEEN-YANG DEFICIENCY
2043
SPLEEN-BLOOD DEFICIENCY
2043
SPLEEN-QI SINKING
2044
SPLEEN NOT CONTROLLING BLOOD
2045
SPLEEN-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2045
COLD-DAMPNESS IN THE SPLEEN
2047
DAMP-HEAT IN THE SPLEEN
2047
SPLEEN-HEAT
2048
PHLEGM OBSTRUCTING THE MIDDLE BURNER
2049
YIN FIRE FROM DEFICIENCY OF THE STOMACH
AND SPLEEN AND ORIGINAL QI
2049
COMBINED PATTERNS
2050
Chapter 93: LIVER
2055
2875
LIVER-QI STAGNATION PATTERNS
2056
REBELLIOUS LIVER-QI
2058
LIVER-YANG RISING
2059
LIVER-BLOOD STASIS
2060
LIVER-FIRE BLAZING UPWARDS
2061
DAMP-HEAT
2061
LIVER-WIND
2063
LIVER-BLOOD DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2067
STAGNATION OF COLD IN THE LIVER CHANNEL
2068
LIVER-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2069
LIVER-QI DEFICIENCY
2070
LIVER PHLEGM-FIRE
2071
LIVER-YANG DEFICIENCY
2072
COMBINED PATTERNS
2073
Chapter 94: LUNGS
2077
LUNG-QI DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2078
LUNG-YANG DEFICIENCY
2079
LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2080
LUNG-QI AND LUNG-YIN DEFICIENCY
2082
LUNG-DRYNESS
2082
INVASION OF LUNGS BY WIND
2083
LUNG-HEAT
2085
PHLEGM PATTERNS
2086
LUNG-QI STAGNATION
2089
LUNG-QI COLLAPSE
2090
COMBINED PATTERNS
2090
Chapter 95: KIDNEYS
2092
KIDNEY-QI DEFICIENCY
2093
KIDNEY-YANG DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2093
KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2095
KIDNEY-YANG AND KIDNEY-YIN DEFICIENCY
PATTERNS
2097
KIDNEY-QI NOT FIRM
2099
KIDNEYS FAILING TO RECEIVE QI
2099
2876
KIDNEY-ESSENCE DEFICIENCY
2100
COMBINED PATTERNS
2101
Chapter 96: SMALL INTESTINE
2106
FULL-HEAT IN THE SMALL INTESTINE
2106
SMALL INTESTINE QI PAIN
2107
SMALL INTESTINE QI TIED
2107
SMALL INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
2108
INFESTATION OF WORMS IN THE SMALL
INTESTINE
2108
Chapter 97: STOMACH
2110
STOMACH-QI DEFICIENCY
2110
STOMACH DEFICIENT AND COLD (STOMACH-
YANG DEFICIENCY)
2111
STOMACH-YIN DEFICIENCY PATTERNS
2112
DEFICIENCY OF STOMACH-YIN AND STOMACH-
YANG
2113
STOMACH-QI STAGNATION
2113
BLOOD STASIS IN THE STOMACH
2114
STOMACH-HEAT
2115
STOMACH-FIRE
2115
STOMACH PHLEGM-FIRE
2116
STOMACH DAMP-HEAT
2116
COLD INVADING THE STOMACH
2117
STOMACH-QI REBELLING UPWARDS
2117
RETENTION OF FOOD IN THE STOMACH
2118
Chapter 98: GALL-BLADDER
2119
DAMP-HEAT PATTERNS
2119
DAMP-COLD IN THE GALL-BLADDER
2121
GALL-BLADDER HEAT
2121
GALL-BLADDER DEFICIENT
2122
STAGNATION OF THE GALL-BLADDER WITH
PHLEGM-HEAT
2122
COMBINED PATTERNS
2123
Chapter 99: LARGE INTESTINE
2124
DAMP-HEAT IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
2125
2877
HEAT PATTERNS
2125
COLD PATTERNS
2126
LARGE INTESTINE DRYNESS
2127
DAMPNESS IN THE LARGE INTESTINE
2128
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND COLD
2128
LARGE INTESTINE DEFICIENT AND DAMP
2129
COLLAPSE OF LARGE INTESTINE
2129
Chapter 100: BLADDER
2131
DAMP-HEAT IN THE BLADDER
2131
DAMP-COLD IN THE BLADDER
2132
BLADDER DEFICIENT AND COLD
2132
SECTION 2: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING
TO QI, BLOOD AND BODY FLUIDS
2134
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO QI,
BLOOD AND BODY FLUIDS
2135
INTRODUCTION
2135
Chapter 101: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO QI, BLOOD, YANG AND YIN
2137
QI
2138
BLOOD
2141
YANG
2144
YIN
2145
COMBINED QI, BLOOD, YIN AND YANG
2146
Chapter 102: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO BODY FLUIDS
2148
DEFICIENCY OF BODY FLUIDS
2149
OEDEMA
2150
PHLEGM
2150
SECTION 3: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING
TO PATHOGENIC FACTORS, FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES
AND THREE BURNERS
2156
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO
PATHOGENIC FACTORS, FOUR LEVELS, SIX STAGES
AND THREE BURNERS
2158
INTRODUCTION
2159
2878
Chapter 103: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO PATHOGENIC FACTORS
2164
INTRODUCTION
2165
WIND
2166
COLD
2171
SUMMER-HEAT
2175
DAMPNESS
2175
DRYNESS
2182
FIRE
2183
Chapter 104: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE FOUR LEVELS
2186
INTRODUCTION
2187
DEFENSIVE-QI LEVEL
2189
QI LEVEL
2192
NUTRITIVE-QI LEVEL
2195
BLOOD LEVEL
2196
THE FOUR LEVELS IN A NUTSHELL
2198
LATENT HEAT
2199
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE FOUR LEVELS, SIX
STAGES AND THREE BURNERS
2204
Chapter 105: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE SIX STAGES
2210
GREATER-YANG STAGE
2211
BRIGHT-YANG STAGE
2214
LESSER-YANG STAGE
2216
GREATER-YIN STAGE
2216
LESSER-YIN STAGE
2217
TERMINAL-YIN STAGE
2218
Chapter 106: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE THREE BURNERS
2219
UPPER BURNER
2220
MIDDLE BURNER
2221
LOWER BURNER
2222
Chapter 107: RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
2224
INTRODUCTION
2225
2879
FORMATION OF RESIDUAL PATHOGENIC FACTOR
2226
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF RESIDUAL
PATHOGENIC FACTOR
2229
PHLEGM
2231
DAMPNESS
2232
HEAT
2235
LESSER-YANG PATTERN
2237
SECTION 4: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING
TO THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES, 12 CHANNELS, EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY VESSELS AND FIVE ELEMENT
2240
IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS ACCORDING TO THE
EIGHT PRINCIPLES, 12 CHANNELS, EIGHT
EXTRAORDINARY VESSELS AND FIVE ELEMENTS
2242
INTRODUCTION
2243
Chapter 108: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES
2245
INTRODUCTION
2246
INTERIOR&#x2013;EXTERIOR
2247
HOT&#x2013;COLD
2251
FULL&#x2013;EMPTY
2258
YIN&#x2013;YANG
2263
Chapter 109: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE 12 CHANNELS
2264
LUNGS
2265
LARGE INTESTINE
2265
STOMACH
2266
SPLEEN
2267
HEART
2267
SMALL INTESTINE
2268
BLADDER
2269
KIDNEYS
2269
PERICARDIUM
2270
TRIPLE BURNER
2271
GALL-BLADDER
2271
LIVER
2272
2880
Chapter 110: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE EIGHT EXTRAORDINARY
VESSELS
2273
INTRODUCTION
2275
GOVERNING VESSEL (DU MAI)
2275
DIRECTING VESSEL (REN MAI)
2276
PENETRATING VESSEL (CHONG MAI)
2277
COMBINED DIRECTING AND PENETRATING
VESSEL PATTERNS
2278
GIRDLE VESSEL (DAI MAI)
2291
YIN HEEL VESSEL (YIN QIAO MAI)
2292
YANG HEEL VESSEL (YANG QIAO MAI)
2293
YIN LINKING VESSEL (YIN WEI MAI)
2294
YANG LINKING VESSEL (YANG WEI MAI)
2296
Chapter 111: IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS
ACCORDING TO THE FIVE ELEMENTS
2298
INTRODUCTION
2299
GENERATING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
2299
OVERACTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
2301
INSULTING SEQUENCE PATTERNS
2302
APPENDICES
2304
Appendix 1: CASE HISTORIES
2305
Appendix 2: PRESCRIPTIONS
2330
Appendix 3: HISTORY OF DIAGNOSIS IN CHINESE
MEDICINE
2403
Glossary of Chinese terms
2426
Bibliography
2449
Chinese chronology
2453
INDEX
2454
Notes
2776
COLOUR PLATES
2777
2881

